Solitary fibrous tumor (SFT) is a rare fibroblastic mesenchymal neoplasm that typically affects spindle cell soft tissues, with most cases being benign and rarely metastasizing. While SFT is commonly found in the pleura and thorax, it can occur in other parts of the body, including the central nervous system (CNS). Malignant intracranial SFT is very rare, often mistaken for meningioma. Metastases of SFT have been reported in various regions, but intracranial malignant SFT metastasizing to the chest wall had not been previously reported. The text describes a case of an 81-year-old man with a history of brain tumor resections, radiation therapy, and polycythemia vera, who was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease and presented with gait disturbance and appetite loss. The patient, who was unemployed and required full assistance for daily activities, presented with abnormal vital signs and complaints of right hemiparesis. Laboratory tests showed various abnormalities in blood values, and imaging exams revealed masses in the left frontal lobe and chest wall. A multidisciplinary consultation led to a suspected diagnosis of a brain tumor with metastatic chest wall involvement. Further examinations and a lung biopsy confirmed the presence of atypical polymorphic cells, suggesting a malignant condition. The text describes a case of a patient with an intracranial malignant solitary fibrous tumor (SFT) that metastasized to the chest wall. The diagnosis was confirmed through immunohistochemical staining and pathological examination. The patient received palliative care and unfortunately passed away. The discussion includes information on the clinical characteristics and outcomes of SFT, with details on the incidence and presentation of SFT in the central nervous system (CNS). The majority of CNS SFT cases are benign, with symptoms such as headache, gait imbalance, weakness, and visual acuity loss. CT scans are commonly used to evaluate thoracic SFT. MRI scans are valuable for detecting tumors and assessing their