Peer-led network interventions in schools have been effective in reducing health behavior problems among adolescents and young adults. These interventions leverage peer leaders who are credible, serve as role models, and have access to informal communication routes. However, research on the implementation processes and practices of peer-led programs is still in its early stages. One key area of focus is optimizing the selection of peer leaders, with influential individuals being found to result in superior diffusion of information through a network. The study discussed in the text focused on the selection and training of peer leaders within schools for a suicide prevention program called Sources of Strength. The study aimed to explore how different theoretical selection methods influence the characteristics of peer leader sets and their proximity to at-risk individuals, as well as the correlation between empirical adult-selected peer leaders and theoretical peer leader sets in relation to message diffusion in interventions. The study found that using network information to select peer leaders can improve the diversity and network position of the peer leader sets, potentially enhancing the diffusion of the intervention in schools. The text also highlights the importance of selecting peer leaders who are close to the at-risk population to effectively reach and support them. Network-informed selection methods were found to be more effective in reaching at-risk students compared to methods that do not consider network connections. The study suggests that popular students may not be as connected or empathetic to the needs of suicidal students in their network, emphasizing the importance of selecting peer leaders who are close to the at-risk population. The text also discusses the relationship between selection methods and diffusion of peer-led interventions in schools, suggesting that opinion leaders play a crucial role in influencing the diffusion of interventions due to their respected role within networks. Future research is recommended to assess the effectiveness of these selection methods in promoting intervention diffusion in school networks.