Aedes aegypti is a significant global vector responsible for transmitting arboviruses like dengue, yellow fever, chikungunya, and Zika viruses. Originally from Africa, this species has adapted to urban areas and human habitats, with genetic variations between populations inside and outside of Africa. Studies have shown distinct genetic structures within and across continents, with limited local migration and significant isolation by distance. Understanding the population structure of Ae. aegypti can aid in disease prevention and control. Factors influencing population structure include habitat stability, urbanization, water storage, vector control, and environmental conditions. Genetic data, particularly mitochondrial DNA analysis, and morphological analysis, such as geometric characteristics like wing size and shape, provide insights into population responses to selective pressures and can aid in predicting biological characteristics of mosquitoes. Studies in West Africa have identified two distinct biogeographic zones based on annual rainfall. The study aimed to analyze genetic and geometric morphometric data of Aedes aegypti mosquitoes in Benin to understand the influence of geography and landscape type on their populations. Mosquitoes were collected from four sites in Benin, with three in the Guinean zone and one in the Sudanian zone. The Guinean zone experiences a tropical climate with human-modified landscapes, while the Sudanian zone is characterized by wooded savannas. Mosquitoes were collected using traps and morphologically identified. Genetic analysis was conducted on specimens from each site. The study used Procrustes analysis and ANOVA to compare wing size and shape variation among mosquitoes from different landscape types. The results aim to contribute to a better understanding of local adaptations in this important vector species for informing targeted vector control measures. The text describes a study on the genetic and morphometric characteristics of four populations of Aedes aegypti mosquitoes in Benin. The researchers