Synthetic block copolymers (BCPs) are key enabling building blocks toward functional organic materials with tunable-by-design properties.1 Hierarchical self-assembly of tailored-made macromolecular architectures into prescribed morphologies (featuring cylinders, lamellae, spheres, etc.)2 with desired functions becomes experimentally facile when fine-tuning the polymer–polymer interactions (Flory–Huggins parameter, χ) for highly immiscible blocks and their volume fractions (f) with an adjusted number of repeating units (N). Traditional coil–coil BCP nanostructures with a domain spacing of tens of nanometers (nm) have paved the way toward the so-called high χ-low N BCPs to obtain smaller features, down to the sub-10 nm dimensions.3 Within high χ-low N BCPs, the sub-blocks have high immiscibility4 and small N values resulting in nanostructures featuring domain sizes as small as 3 nm, highly seeked for nanopatterning applications.5,6 Oligosaccharides function simultaneously as sustainable and key-enabling high χ building blocks to allow for sub-10 nm BCP domain sizes.7−11 Moreover, oligosaccharide-based BCPs can be elegantly synthesized with ready-made synthetic building blocks utilizing the copper(I)-catalyzed alkyne–azide cycloaddition (CuAAC) click reaction.12,13

We designed and synthesized high χ-low N maltoheptaose (MH) and polyisoprene (PI) block coelastomers using CuAAC coupling to target triazole junction point functionality.14 The MH vs PI sub-block’s high polarity difference leads to high immiscibility and hence high χ.15 The flexible PI sub-block consists of an ideal complementary block for BCP processing through providing a soft matrix. In addition to the influence of χ and f, supramolecular interactions (e.g., π–π stacking,16 hydrogen bonding,17 and ionic interactions18,19) at the BCP interface have recently demonstrated compelling evidence for enhanced self-assembly, ionic interactions notably inducing unique counterion effects.19 Ionically conducting BCP thin films with controlled structure orientation (perpendicular or parallel) with respect to electrodes are highly seeked in order to allow for efficient anisotropic ionic transport.20 To date, BCP domain orientation in thin films relies on mastering the subtle interplay of varying energies at polymer–air, polymer–polymer, and polymer–substrate interfaces.21 To address this issue, we report on the effect of electrostatic interactions at charge-modified BCP interfaces to control the self-assembly of oligosaccharide-based high χ-low N BCPs. MH1.2k-(triazolium+/TFSI–)-PI4.3k-(triazolium+/TFSI–)-MH1.2k triBCP thin films were prepared accordingly, wherein the formation of ionic nanochannels guides the BCP structure orientation (Scheme 1). Generally, controlling the orientation of BCP structures from several μm2 up to the cm2 range is realized with the help of shearing22 and external fields23 (e.g., electric or magnetic) or through templating.24 Here, we show how charge cohesion of the BCP interfaces promotes unidirectional perpendicular lamella (Lam) nanostructure formation over areas of several μm2 for solvent-vapor-annealed25,26 (SVA) BCP thin films. We provide a direct vs reciprocal space quantification of sub-10 nm Lam domain spacing (d) in thin films with atomic force microscopy (AFM) imaging and grazing-incidence small-angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS), respectively.
Ready-made MH (highly discrete number-average molar mass Mn distribution, with Mn= 1.2 kg mol–1: Figure S1) and hemitelechelic α-monohydroxy-end-capped (Mn= 3.6 kg mol–1) and homotelechelic α,ω-bishydroxy-end-capped PIs (Mn = 4.3 kg mol–1 and Mn= 9.0 kg mol–1, respectively) were end-functionalized and further used in the synthesis of AB diBCPs and ABA triBCPs through CuAAC (Scheme 1). Coupling reaction conditions and polymer characterizations are described in the Supporting Information (SI) (Figures S2–S8). The reducing chain end of MH was selectively functionalized with an alkyne moiety, using propargyl amine.27 PIs (D = Mw/Mn = 1.09–1.25) were modified with 6-azido-hexanoic acid to afford end-functionalized elastomer sub-blocks with an azide function. CuAAC yielded MH1.2k-(triazole)-PI3.6k diBCP and MH1.2k-(triazole)-PI4.3k/9k-(triazole)-MH1.2k triBCP model compounds with 1,2,3-triazole (T) junction units (Table S1 for polymer properties). Finally, a straightforward route to the BCP ionic interface is demonstrated by n-alkylation of triazole ring(s) with N-methyl bis[(trifluoromethyl)sulfonyl]imide (MeTFSI) or iodomethane (MeI), creating a methyltriazolium (T+)/counteranion– (TFSI– or I–) junction separating the sub-blocks. Full conversion of T junctions to T+/TFSI– using MeTFSI was verified with 1H NMR spectroscopy (Figures S9 and S10). N-Alkylation with MeI did not reach full conversion, even with prolonged reaction times, ambient temperature, or an extra amount of reagent (Figures S9 and S11). The T+/I– interface is thermally unstable, resulting in N-demethylation.28 Moreover, MeI reacts with PI double bonds by coordination bonding, even covalently,29 reducing the triazole-to-methyltriazolium (T-to-T+) conversion. The results related to MeI are therefore presented here as a normative base for comparing effects of the counterion (TFSI– or I–) onto BCP self-assembly.

BCP glass transition temperatures (Tg) were determined with differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) (Figures S12–14 and Table S1). Tg values varied in between 5 and 19 °C for pristine and charge-modified BCPs. PI backbone structures rich in 1,2- and 3,4-addition typically have higher Tg values than PIs exhibiting only 1,4-structure.30 Thermal transitions observed during the first heating scan could not be reproduced during the second cycle for any of the BCPs studied. Order–disorder transition temperature (TODT) for MH-based BCPs with high χ is expected to be high, possibly unobtainable before triggering the BCP thermal degradation. Further annealing steps during DSC measurements below BCP TODT were not performed in order to avoid their chemical degradations.31

Variable-temperature SAXS characterizations for all di- and triBCPs were performed to quantify the effect of thermal treatment on nanostructure formation for the investigated polymer architectures (Figure​Figure11). We discuss the effect of the counteranion on phase behavior and, additionally for pristine vs charge-modified triBCPs, the effect of two different Mn values for the PI middle sub-block.
The downsizing effect of thermal treatment onto the domain spacing (d) for charge-modified BCPs is evident from the comparison of the primary scattering peak (q*) positions after heating (Figure​Figure11b, c, e, f, h, i; dashed vertical lines). Pristine di- and triBCP q* positions remain unchanged and with a broad profile (Figure​Figure11a, d, g). A clear enhancement for the hexagonally packed cylinder (Hex) morphology is observed in SAXS profiles for MH1.2k-(T+/TFSI–)-PI3.6k and MH1.2k-(T+/I–)-PI3.6k diBCPs with Bragg reflections (Figure​Figure11b,c) displaying q/q* ratios: 1, √3, 2, √7, and √12. MH cylinders in the PI matrix are indicated with fPI = 86.15 MH1.2k-(T+/TFSI–)-PI3.6k with the T+/TFSI– junction has a reduced d = 12 nm compared to the pristine diBCP (d = 14 nm) (Figure​Figure11a,b). The Hex phase evolves between 150 and 180 °C for both charge-modified diBCPs. Interestingly, MH1.2k-(T+/I–)-PI3.6k and pristine diBCP Hex morphologies present the same d values. d remains unaffected possibly because of partial T-to-T+/I– conversion, leading to incomplete ion connectivity between the interfaces.

The charge-modified MH1.2k-(T+/TFSI–)-PI4.3k-(T+/TFSI–)-MH1.2k and MH1.2k-(T+/I–)-PI4.3k-(T+/I–)-MH1.2k triBCPs both show the Lam morphology at 170 °C, with a considerable decrease of d of ca. 5 nm when compared to pristine MH1.2k-(T)-PI4.3k-(T)-MH1.2k with d = 16 nm (Figure​Figure11d–f). The MH1.2k-(T+/I–)-PI4.3k-(T+/I–)-MH1.2k analogue preserves the long-range order with decreased d after heating. Compared to diBCPs, the ABA triBCP architecture with polydisperse middle B block can experience packing frustrations during phase transition.32 Exemplifying this phenomenon, pristine triBCP with a dispersed (D = 1.25) PI4.3k middle block and fPI = 78 resulted in a Hex phase with a curved interface. Counterion mobility and solubility can either suppress or enhance BCP nanostructure formation,33 with confined counterions at the interface possibly suppressing phase separation as a consequence of an entropic penalty. TriBCPs with the PI9.0k middle block (D = 1.09) and fPI = 88 form Hex phases regardless of the counterion, yet with a smaller d for MH1.2k-(T)-PI9k-(T)-MH1.2k compared to the T+/TFSI– interface triBCP supporting the effects of middle-block dispersity on phase separation (Figure​Figure11d,g). MH1.2k-(T+/I–)-PI3.6k, MH1.2k-(T+/I–)-PI4.3k/9.0k-(T+/I–)-MH1.2k diBCP, and triBCP SAXS data illustrate that T-to-T+/I- full conversion is needed neither to achieve long-range order (Figure​Figure11c, f, i) nor to decrease the d. The bulky TFSI– counterion can disrupt block–block interactions restraining crystallization for rod–coil BCPs.19 Similar disturbed interactions are evidenced in MH1.2k-(T+/TFSI–)-PI4.3k-(T+/TFSI–)-MH1.2k and MH1.2k-(T+/TFSI–)-PI9k-(T+/TFSI–)-MH1.2k SAXS data, as MH hydrogen bonding and T+/TFSI– interface interactions hamper the phase transition (Figure​Figure11e,h). Pristine MH1.2k-(T)-PI9k-(T)-MH1.2k higher-order reflections appeared on reheating to 185 °C, but the primary scattering peak (q*) remained broad and of low intensity after heating, indicating a rather disordered final nanostructure (Figure​Figure11g).

As the effect of the T+/TFSI– interface on enhancing the triBCP bulk self-assembly seemed moderate according to variable-temperature SAXS, we next focused our attention on thin film self-assembly and solvent vapor annealing (SVA). AFM was used to image MH1.2k-(T+/TFSI–)-PI4.3k-(T+/TFSI–)-MH1.2k and MH1.2k-(T)-PI4.3k-(T)-MH1.2k triBCP thin films prepared by spin-coating on plasma-treated silicon wafers (see details in the SI). To assess the effect of the T+/TFSI– interface on thin film morphology and structure orientation related to the substrate surface, the BCP film thickness, substate surface energy, and SVA time with solvent composition used were kept constant throughout the experiments. SVA was performed in a closed container for 24 h using a THF/H2O 90:10 wt % solvent mixture placed next to the thin film. A film thickness of ca. 21 nm after SVA was determined with AFM from film scratch height. As-cast MH1.2k-(T+/TFSI–)-PI4.3k-(T+/TFSI–)-MH1.2k and MH1.2k-(T)-PI4.3k-(T)-MH1.2k thin films displayed an initial disordered surface topography (Figure S18). After SVA, the differences in the film topographical features became highly salient (Figure​Figure22). As the pristine MH1.2k-(T)-PI4.3k-(T)-MH1.2k thin film fingerprint lines align locally, forming small-size granular domains (highlighted in Figure​Figure22c,d with circles), the charge-modified MH1.2k-(T+/TFSI–)-PI4.3k-(T+/TFSI–)-MH1.2k thin film features unidirectionally aligned lines across the image (Figures​Figures22a,b and S16), over distances of 500 nm. The line spacing (L) extracted from FFTs indicated a d value of 11 nm (L = 5.5 nm) for MH1.2k-(T+/TFSI–)-PI4.3k-(T+/TFSI–)-MH1.2k and d value of ca. 14 nm for MH1.2k-(T)-PI4.3k-(T)-MH1.2k (L varies between 6.6 and 7.4 nm) (Figure​Figure22a,c). The MH1.2k-(T+/TFSI–)-PI4.3k-(T+/TFSI–)-MH1.2k thin film lines appear hazy (Figure​Figure22a). 3D visualization of a MH1.2k-(T+/TFSI–)-PI4.3k-(T+/TFSI–)-MH1.2k thin film height image shows a surface roughness of ca. 4 nm, as the higher surface energy PI block protrudes at the air–polymer surface (Figure S15). Nanostructure orientations are highlighted with 2D FFT filtering (Gwyddion software) (Figure​Figure22b,d). Filtered separated data (difference image in Figure​Figure22b inset) reveal clear bright/dark alternating lines. Applying the same filtering procedure for areas in the ellipsoidal FFT profile of the MH1.2k-(T)-PI4.3k-(T)-MH1.2k thin film allows distinguishing the local granular domain alignment (red and blue circles in Figure​Figure22d) with varying line orientations (red and blue arrows Figure​Figure22d).
Figure​Figure33 further confirmed that the MH1.2k-(T+/TFSI–)-PI4.3k-(T+/TFSI–)-MH1.2k thin film unidirectional line orientation extends up to the 5 μm2 area. Curiously, careful AFM imaging revealed minority areas with hexagonal arrays of isolated dots on the surface complicating the structure interpretation (Figures​Figures33, image 4, and S17).
GISAXS characterizations confirmed the morphologies for MH1.2k-(T+/TFSI–)-PI4.3k-(T+/TFSI–)-MH1.2k and MH1.2k-(T)-PI4.3k-(T)-MH1.2k thin films (Figure​Figure44). Charge-modified triBCP showed a clear in-plane Lam scattering pattern (q* = 0.6, 2q* = 1.2) with a dcharged value of 10.5 nm (Figure​Figure44a,b). Whereas sharp spots are clearly seen at the in-plane Yoneda line for the T+/TFSI– interface (Figure​Figure44a,b), a pristine MH1.2k-(T)-PI4.3k-(T)-MH1.2k thin film displays broad peaks with Debye–Scherrer rings (pointed with arrows in Figure​Figure44d,e) attributed to the tilted domain orientations within the thin film.34 A Lam nanostructure is also obtained for the MH1.2k-(T)-PI4.3k-(T)-MH1.2k thin film (q* = 0.48, 2q* = 0.95) with dneutral = 13 nm (Figure​Figure44e) in full agreement with AFM analyses. Intense rod-shaped out-of-plane reflections are seen for both pristine and charge-modified thin films (Figure​Figure44a and c and ​and4d4d and f). These Bragg rods result from incident beam reflection from an ultrathin BCP film where the perpendicular Lam nanostructure is aligned parallel with respect to the reflected beam35 (schematics Figure​Figure44a). The charge-modified triBCP thin film produces a sharp and narrow Bragg rod compared to the broad and somewhat distorted one shown by the pristine triBCP thin film due to Debye–Scherrer rings distorting the rod reflections (Figure​Figure44a,c and ​and4d,f).4d,f). GISAXS data for as-cast MH1.2k-(T+/TFSI–)-PI4.3k-(T+/TFSI–)-MH1.2k and MH1.2k-(T)-PI4.3k-(T)-MH1.2k thin films did not show notable structure development. (Figure S18). Evidence for the Hex phase formation in thin films was not observed with GISAXS. We therefore conclude on Lam structure formation for MH1.2k-(T+/TFSI–)-PI4.3k-(T+/TFSI–)-MH1.2k, both in bulk and for the thin film, regardless of fPI = 78 (Figure​Figure11e and ​and1a–c).1a–c). The AFM imaging of a grain boundary with merged facing line frontiers (Figure S16) supports the claims that dotted features (Figures​Figures33 image 4 and S17) are nonequilibrium structures within a swollen BCP thin film. This is also compatible with dispersity-induced PI4.3k middle-block packing frustrations which affect the evolution of the surface morphology.32
Oligosaccharide-based BCPs are highly responsive to SVA7 and microwave annealing.36 Modeling studies have revealed that the solvation of the TFSI– counteranions with water molecules is imparted by strong hydrogen-bonding interactions37 and TFSI– anions contributing to the nanophase segregation process at play within thin films of MH-based triBCPs. Tetrahydrofuran promotes the mobility of the PI sub-block during SVA, while minute amounts of water facilitate interactions of TFSI– with MH sub-blocks. Importantly, the THF/water mixture offers a neutral top layer for both MH and PI sub-blocks to emerge at the polymer-THF/water interface, promoting an equilibrium Lam formation, possibly transiting through a perpendicular Hex top layer structure before stabilizing into a final perpendicularly aligned Lam38 (Figure​Figure33 and S17).

The MH1.2k-(T+/TFSI–)-PI4.3k-(T+/TFSI-)-MH1.2k Lam nanostructure depends on the ca. 21 nm thin film thickness (t), which is commensurate with the dcharged = 10.5 nm of the Lam (t/dcharged = 2). We suggest that strong electrostatic interactions of T+/TFSI– trigger the self-assembly of well-connected channels, enabling the unidirectional Lam alignment with a 2.5 nm decrease in d, regardless of the high fPI (Figure​Figure55). Luo et al. reported on locally aligned structures for thermally annealed and reactive ion-etched PDMS1.7k-b-PMMA5.1k thin films, unaffected by the presence of an ionic junction interfacing the PDMS and PMMA sub-blocks.18 Vice versa, Ji et al. reported on poly(3-hexylthiophene) amorphization due to a T+/TFSI– interface hampering with rod-block π–π interactions upon thermal annealing of poly(3-hexylthiophene)-b-poly(methyl methacrylate).19 As we rely on a thin film thickness commensurate with the domain spacing (vide supra) and SVA for enhancing TFSI– mobility, the electrostatic interactions prevail, leading to well-connected T+/TFSI– interfacial ionic nanochannels. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of a long-range unidirectional alignment for a BCP Lam nanostructure induced by electrostatic interactions within ionic nanochannels defined by T+/counteranion– junctions separating polymeric sub-blocks. We emphasize on utilizing SVA with optimized BCP film thicknesses to enable strong electrostatic interactions within ionic nanochannels to result in long-range aligned microphase-separated morphologies. Increasing the fPIMn to 9.0 kg mol–1 in triBCP thin film indicates the formation of a Hex phase (Figure​Figure11g,h,i) and requires rebalancing the surface energies for the successful formation of ionic nanochannels.
To summarize, we show how one can leverage copper(I)-catalyzed alkyne–azide cycloaddition (CuAAC) click chemistry and n-alkylated triazolium+/counteranion– junctions to enhance the bulk and thin film self-assembly of high χ-low N diblock and triblock copolymers using maltoheptaose (MH) and polyisoprene (PI) sub-blocks. Full T-to-T+/TFSI– conversion is obtained using MeTFSI in n-alkylation. Interestingly, despite conversion as low as 11% for T-to-T+/I–, SAXS studies confirmed enhanced BCP microphase separation, illustrating the powerfulness of T+/counteranion– junctions to fine-tune BCP self-assembly. TFSI– solubilization during SVA of the BCP thin film together with optimized film thickness enable long-range-ordered unidirectional perpendicular Lam formation, quantified for MH1.2k-(T+/TFSI–)-PI4.3k-(T+/TFSI–)-MH1.2k thin film with both real-space (AFM) and reciprocal-space (GISAXS) analyses. Large areas of several μm2 featuring sub-10 nm charge-modified triBCP domains are remarkably uniform and easily fabricated. Long-range nanostructure orientation is conveniently achieved without shearing or relying on graphoepitaxy, highlighting how electrostatic interactions facilitate BCP domain alignment through ionic nanochannel formation. Considering the library of BCPs accessible through CuAAC click chemistry of hemitelechelic and homotelechelic synthetic or biosourced/based polymeric building blocks, thereby amenable to n-alkylation of triazole junction units, this study opens doors to explore long-range ordered BCP thin films for advanced nanopatterning (nanoelectronics) or efficient and dimensionality-controlled ionic transport for electrochemical energy storage (nanoionics).
