POLYMORPHONUCLEAR neutrophils (neutrophils) are nonproliferative circulating phagocytes that actively participate in the first line of self-defense. They are called into function by, and respond to, various soluble and particulate agonists, which use a variety of signaling mechanisms. In addition to the well-known polyphosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C-dependent pathway,1, 2
it has also been shown that neutrophil activation was associated with an increase inthe levels of tyrosine phosphorylation.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18
Evidence for a signaling role of the latter, mainly pharmacologic in nature, was alsorecently obtained.8, 11, 15, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31,32, 33, 34, 35, 36
The mechanisms underlying the stimulated increases in the levels of tyrosine phosphorylation in human neutrophils are still poorly understood. The presence of tyrosine kinase and phosphatases in neutrophils has been demonstrated.6, 18, 33, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41
The sensitivity of the tyrosine phosphorylation responses to tyrosine kinaseinhibitors provides indirect evidence for the involvement of tyrosine kinases in theregulation of neutrophil responses. On the other hand, the ability of tyrosinephosphatase inhibitors such as vanadate and phenylarsine oxide to increase the levelsof tyrosine phosphorylation and to stimulate the oxidative burst in human neutrophils 38,42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47 indicates that tyrosine phosphatases are also present and active in these cells.

While both soluble and particulate agonists increase the levels of tyrosine phosphorylation in human neutrophils, it is clear that these responses result from the occupation of distinct classes of cell surface receptors. These include G protein-coupled receptors (chemotactic factors), hematopoeitic growth factor receptors [granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)], Fcγ receptors, and integrins. Of particular relevance is the observation that all of these receptors lack the domains known to encode for intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity. It is therefore likely that the increases in tyrosine phosphorylation observed on the occupation of these various receptors result from the activation of nonreceptor tyrosine kinases, of which several classes are known to be present in hematopoeitic cells.

Tyrosine kinases belong to one of eight general families.48
Of these, the src-related tyrosine kinases have most often been found to associatewith hematopoietic cell surface receptors. 49
All encode membrane-associated kinases, which do not possess a membrane-spanningdomain and which bind to the cytoplasmic surface of cellular plasma membranes. Muchof what is known regarding the role of src-related tyrosine kinases in the molecularaspects of cellular regulation has been garnered from the study of oncogenes andtransformed cell lines or from that of lymphocytes. However, the role of proteintyrosine phosphorylation in the regulation of terminally differentiated cells such asneutrophils has not been completely explored. Nevertheless, the presence andactivation of a few src-related tyrosine kinases has recently been demonstrated inhuman neutrophils. For example, the stimulation of the activity of lyn and yes byGM-CSF, of syk by occupation of FcγR, and of fgr by fibronectin has been demonstrated.

However revealing as they may be, these data are still incomplete as the patterns of tyrosine phosphorylation induced by various classes of neutrophil agonists differ both qualitatively and kinetically.
However, the latter do share some apparently common characteristics as evidenced byone- and two-dimensional phosphotyrosine blots. These observations suggest that thetyrosine phosphorylation pathways activated in human neutrophils by soluble andparticulate agonists will share some elements, while also including agonist-specificdeterminants.

In the present study, we have investigated the potential activation of lyn on stimulation of human neutrophils by soluble [fMet-Leu-Phe, GM-CSF, interleukin 8 (IL-8), NAP-2, and Groα] and particulate (monosodium urate [MSU] and calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate [CPPD] crystals, bacteria, and zymosan) agonists. The results indicate that the activation of lyn represents one of the common steps in the excitation-response coupling sequence in human neutrophils.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cells
Neutrophils were obtained from healthy adults volunteers as previously described,
and were resuspended at a concentration of 40 × 106 cells/mL in Hanks' Balanced SaltSolution (HBSS) containing no magnesium, pH 7.4.

Reagents
The antiphosphotyrosine antibody (UB 05-321) was purchased from Upstate Biotechnology, Inc (Lake Placid, NY); the anti-lyn antibody and immunizing peptides were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc (Santa Cruz, CA). The enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) reagents used for Western Blotting and γ-[32P]-adenosine triphosphate (ATP) were purchased from Du Pont-New England Nuclear (Mississauga, Ontario, Canada). Triclinic MSU and CPPD crystals were kindly provided by R. de Mέdicis and prepared as previously described.
The chemokines were generously provided by Dr Ian Clark-Lewis (University of BritishColumbia, British Columbia, Canada) (NAP-2, and Groα) and Dr Caroline Hebert(Genentech Inc, South San Francisco, CA) (human recombinant IL-8). Zymosan wasobtained from the Sigma Chemical Co (St Louis, MO), and heated to 100°C for 60minutes before use. The Staphyloccocal aureus suspensions were heated to 100°C for 1hour, opsonized by incubation in normal human serum for 30 minutes at 37°C beforebeing washed, and resuspended in RPMI (GIBCO, Burlington, Ontario, Canada).

Immunoprecipitation and immunokinase assay
Human neutrophils (40 × 106 cells/mL) were incubated for 5 minutes at 37°C before stimulation with the indicated agonists. The stimulation conditions for each experiment are detailed in the appropriate figure legends. The reactions were stopped by addition of cold lysis buffer (20 mmol/L Tris HC1 pH 7.4, 137 mmol/L NaCl, 1 mmol/L MgCL, 1 mmol/L CaCl2, 10% (vol/vol) glycerol, 1% Nonidet P-40, 2 mmol/ L NaVO4, 1 mmol/L phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 10 μg/mL apro-tinin, 10 μg/mL leupeptin, 1 μmol/L pepstatin). After incubation on ice for 10 minutes, the insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 13,000g for 15 minutes at 4°C. The soluble proteins were incubated with 8 μL of antibody for 90 minutes at 4°C followed by a 60-minute incubation with protein A Sepharose. Successive washes of the immune complexes were performed with HBSS containing 1% Nonidet P-40, LiCl 0.5 mmol/L, Tris-HCl 100 mmol/L, pH 7.5, followed by a final wash in 100 mmol/L NaCl, 1 mmol/L EDTA, 100 mmol/L Tris-HCl pH 7.5. The reactions were carried out in kinase buffer consisting of 20 mmol/L Tris HC1, pH 7.4, 5 mmol/ L MgCl2, 5 mmol/L MnCl2, 5 μmol/L ATP and 10 μCi of γ-[32P]ATP per sample. After 20 minutes at room temperature, the beads were washed in lysis buffer containing 20 mmol/L EDTA and 1 mmol/L phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, and the immune precipitates were then subjected to 7.5% to 20% sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gels (SDS-PAGE), transferred onto Immobilon polyvinyldene fluoride (PVDF) membranes (Millipore Corp, Mississauga, Ontario, Canada), autoradiographed for 20 minutes, and scanned.

lmmunoblotting
After stimulation, 100 μL of the cell suspensions were added to 100 μL of 2x Laemmli's sample buffer preheated at 95°C while the remaining 500 μL were submitted to immunoprecipitation. The transferred proteins to Immobilon PDVF membranes were then immunoblotted. Nonspecific sites were blocked using 2% gelatin in TBS-Tween (25 mmol/L Tris-HCl, pH 7.8, 190 mmol/L NaCl, 0.15% Tween 20) for 1 hour at 37°C and then probed with polyclonal anti-lyn (final dilution of 1/1,000) or with the monoclonal anti-phosphotyrosine antibody (final dilution of 1/4,000) in fresh blocking solution. The secondary antibodies used were horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated goat-antirabbit or sheep-antimouse Igs used at a 1/15,000 dilution in blocking solution for 45 minutes at 37°C. The immunoblots were developed using the chemiluminescence method following the manufacturer's guidelines.

(32)Pi labeling of human neutrophils
The cells (40 × 106 cells/ mL) were resuspended in loading buffer (20 mmol/L HEPES/Tris pH 7.4, 150 mmol/L NaCl, 5 mmol/L KCl, 10 mmol/L glucose) containing 0.4 mCi/mL of 12P-labeled phosphoric acid. After 1 hour at 37°C, the cells were then washed twice in HBSS pH 7.4 and stimulated. The experiments were terminated and immunoprecipitations as well as immunobloting procedures performed as described above.

Phosphoamino acid analysis
Two-dimensional thin-layer electrophoresis (TLE) of phosphoamino acids was performed. The 32P-labeled band corresponding to autophosphorylated human neutrophil lyn was cut out of the immobilon PVDF membrane and hydrolysed in the presence of 6 mmol/L HC1 at 100°C. Samples containing unlabeled phosphotyrosine, phosphothreonine, and phosphoserine (5 μg of each) as standards, were applied to cellulose plates (100 μmol/ L DC-cellulose; Canlab, Pointe-Claire, Quέbec, Canada) and separated by electrophoresis in the first dimension at pH 1.9 (50 mL of formic acid, 156 mL of glacial acetic acid, and 1,794 mL of water) for 25 minutes at 1,000 V followed by a second dimension at pH 3.5 (100 mL of glacial acetic acid, 10 mL of pyridine, and 1,890 mL of water) for 16 minutes at 1,300 V. The standards were revealed by ninhydrin, and the 32P-labeled amino acids were identified by autoradiography.

RESULTS
In vitro tyrosine kinase activity
Stimulation of human neutrophils with soluble factors such as the chemotactic factor fMet-Leu-Phe, the chemokines IL-8, NAP-2, and Groα, the hematopoeitic growth factor GM-CSF, or with particulate factors such as inflammatory microcrystals (MSU or CPPD crystals), zymosan, aggregated IgG,and phagocytic stimuli
induces specific and characteristic patterns of tyrosine phosphorylation. While theincreased levels of tyrosine phosphorylation is likely to result, at least in part,from the stimulation of the activity of tyrosine kinases, the specific identity ofthe tyrosine kinases that respond to various agonists in neutrophils is onlybeginning to be defined. Therefore, we investigated whether neutrophil stimulation bysoluble or particulate agonists affected the in vitro kinase activity of thesrc-related kinase lyn. To examine whether human neutrophil-derived lyn wasenzymatically active, lysates from stimulated neutrophils were tested in immunecomplex kinase assays. Basal in vitro tyrosine kinase activity was detected in lynimmunoprecipitates
lyn demonstrated a time-dependent increase in autophosphorylation on stimulation withchemotactic factors or particulate agonists. The data shown in 
A and B demonstrate that the chemotactic factors rapidly increased the level of tyrosine phosphorylation of lyn albeit with slightly different time courses. This effect was time-dependent, could be detected within 5 to 10 seconds, was maximal at 1 minute, and progressively decreased until 10 minutes. The precipitates were also blotted with the anti-lyn antibody demonstrated that equal amounts of lyn were present in all the samples tested (results not shown). As previously reported,
 GM-CSF was also found to stimulate the activity of lyn in human neutrophils (results not shown).
 Fig 1. Effect of various agonists on the autophosphorylation activity of immunoprecipitated lyn in human neutrophils. Human neutrophils were stimulated with 10-7 mol/L fMet-Leu-Phe, IL-8, NAP-2, or Groα, 3 mg/mL zymosan, or 10 bacteria/cell for the indicated times before being processed for the immune kinase assay as detailed in Materials and Methods. (A) fMet-Leu-Phe; (B) IL-8, NAP-2, and Groα; (C) zymosan and bacteria. These data are from individual experiments representative of at least three other independent determinations.
 Fig 2. Effect of MSU microcrystals on the autophosphorylation activity of immunoprecipitated lyn and on the levels of tyrosine phosphorylation in human neutrophils. Neutrophils suspensions were incubated with 3 mg/mL MSU microcrystals for the indicated times at which samples were taken for the determination of the tyrosine phoshorylation levels (by immunoblots) and for the immune kinase assay as described in Materials and Methods. (A) Immune kinase data; (B) data obtained by immunoblotting with an anti-phosphotyro-sine antibody. These data are from a single experiment representative of at least three other independent determinations.

The activation of lyn was not limited to the stimulation of neutrophils by soluble agonists. As illustrated in Figs l and 2, zymosan, bacteria and MSU crystals also enhanced the autophosphorylation of lyn. Increases in lyn autophos-phorylation activity was also detected in immunoprecipitates from cells exposed to CPPD crystals (results not shown). Preliminary experiments indicated that opsonization of zymosan was not required for the detection of an enhancement of lyn activity but, on the other hand, that the responses to bacteria were more consistent if opsonized (results not shown). The time course of the stimulation of the tyrosine phosphorylation induced by MSU crystals additionally demonstrates a good correlation between the two parameters studied. Increases in lyn autophosphorylation and in tyrosine phosphorylation were detectable within 1 minute, reached a maximum at l0 minutes, and progressively decreased thereafter.

The specificity of the immunoprecipitation protocol was tested next and illustrated using MSU crystals as agonist. In these experiments, the anti-lyn antibody was pre-incubated without or with the immunizing peptide before being used to immunoprecipitate lyn from untreated cells or cells stimulated with MSU crystals. As shown in Fig 3B, the addition of the peptide specifically eliminated a band that corresponds to the molecular weight of lyn. The band immediately above that corresponding to lyn represents the heavy chain of the immunoprecipitating antibodies. The peptide also reduced to a major extent the amounts of lyn kinase activity recovered in the precipitates from untreated or MSU-stimulated neutrophils.
Fig 3. Specificity of the immunoprecipitation protocol. Human neutrophils were stimulated with 3 mg/mL MSU microcrystals for 15 minutes and processed for the immune kinase assay as described in Materials and Methods. The anti-lyn antibody was used either as is, or following a 2-hour incubation with 8 μg/rnL of the immunizing peptide at room temperature. (A) Immune kinase results; (B) an immunoblot of the same membrane probed with the anti-lyn antibody. The diffuse band above that corresponding to lyn (indicated by an arrow) is due to the heavy chain of the immunoprecipitating antibody. These data are from a single experiment representative of at least three other independent determinations.

Phosphoamino acid analysis
To determine whether the kinase activity detected in vitro was specific for tyrosine residues, the band corresponding to lyn was excised and subjected to phosphoamino acid analysis. As shown in 
Fig 4
, the only phosphorylated amino acid detected in the anti-lyn precipitates derived from neutrophils stimulated by MSU crystals, Groα, or IL-8 was phosphotyrosine. Similar results were obtained for the other agonists shown to increase lyn autophosphorylating activity, ie, NAP-2, fMet-Leu-Phe. CPPD. and zymosan (data not shown). Thus, the kinase activity responsible for phosphorylation of lyn in vitro displayed a specificity for tyrosine residues.
Fig 4. Phosphoaminoacid analysis of the phosphorylating activity of immunoprecipitated lyn in control and stimulated human neutrophils. Cell suspensions were stimulated with 15 minutes with 3 mg/mL MSU microcrystals or for 15 seconds with 10-7 mmol/L Grow or NAP-2 before being processed for phosphoaminoacid determination as described in Materials and Methods. These data are from a single experiment representative of three other independent determinations.

32P-labeling and immunoprecipitation
As an independent means of determining whether autophosphorylating activity of lyn occurred in vivo, intact cells were metabolically labeled with 32P-orthophosphoric acid, stimulated with the desired agonist, lysed, and lyn immunoprecipitated as described above. The data obtained with MSU crystals and with fMet-Leu-Phe are illustrated in 
Fig 5
. These results demonstrate that a time-dependent and transient increase in the in situ phosphorylation of lyn was observed in response to both MSU crystals and fMet-Leu-Phe. Furthermore, the kinetics of this effect were similar to that observed in the immune kinase assay. Similar results were obtained with the three C-X-C chemokines tested and with GM-CSF (results not shown). Immunoblotting of the lyn immunoprecipitatcs with antiphosphotyrosine antibodies indicated that stimulation of labeled human neutrophils with the above agonists led to a significant increase in its phosphotyrosine contents. This is illustrated in 
Fig 5
 in the case of MSU crystals, and was also observed in fMet-Leu-Phe-stimulated cells (results not shown). Thus, lyn is transiently tyrosine phosphorylated in vivo on stimulation with various agonists.
 Fig 5. In situ 32P-labeling and tyrosine phosphorylation of lyn in control and stimulated human neutrophils. The cells were pre-labeled as described in Materials and Methods. They were stimulated with fMet-Leu-Phe or MSU microcrystals for the indicated times, lysed, and immunoprecipitated with the anti-lyn antibodies. The immuno-precipitates were analyzed by SDS-PAGE, transferred to immobilon PVDF membranes, and the radioactivity levels incorporated into lyn as well as its phosphotyrosine contents detected by autoradiography and immunoblotting, respectively. (A) Autoradiographs; (B) anti-phosphotyrosine immunoblots. These data are from a single experiment representative of three other independent determinations.

DISCUSSION
Although significant evidence has recently accumulated implicating a signaling role for tyrosine phosphorylation, little is known about the specifics of the mechanisms leading to the observed stimulation of the levels of tyrosine phosphorylation in human neutrophils. The data presented above identify one enzymatic pathway, the activation of which is induced by soluble and particulate agonists alike, namely that dependent on the src-related tyrosine kinase lyn. Stimulation of human neutrophils with soluble (fMet-Leu-Phe. GM-CSF, and chemokines) or particulate (microcrystals. bacteria, and zymosan) agonists lead to a rapid and time-dependent increase in the tyrosine autophosphorylating activity of the lyn. The speed of onset of this response places such an event in close proximity to the occupation of the various receptors and supports the hypothesis that it may be involved in the initiation and/or modulation of those neutrophil responses that have been pharmacologically related to tyrosine phosphorylation, namely the activation of phospholipase D, the stimulation of the NAPDH oxidase, the upregulation of CD11b/CD18, adherence. and locomotion.
 The ability of various classes of neutrophil agonists to stimulate the activity of lyn suggests that this kinase plays a pivotal role in the signal transduction mechanisms of human neutrophils and that it may contribute to the regulation of the complex physiologic responses elicited by those agonists in human neutrophils.

The activation of lyn was detected using three independent protocols: an immune kinase assay performed on immuno-precipitates, an in situ 32P-labeling technique, and an immunoblotting assay performed on immunoprecipitates derived from stimulated neutrophils. That the autophosphorylation of lyn was associated with an increase in tyrosine kinase activity was indicated by preliminary experiments that showed that lyn immunoprecipitated from stimulated cells exhibited increased phosphorylation activity toward two different exogenous substrates—a peptide derived from the amino acid sequence surrounding the phosphorylation site in pp60src (RR-SRC; GIBCO BRL, Grand Island, NY) as well as the immunoglobulin heavy chains (results not shown). It is noteworthy that all methods yielded similar results. Increased tyrosine kinase (as evidenced by phosphoamino acid analysis) activity was recovered in lyn immunoprecipitates from stimulated cells. Furthermore, stimulation of 32P-labeled cells also led to increased labeling of lyn, thereby demonstrating that this effect took place within the intact and complete environment of the cells. Immunoblotting of lyn immunoprecipitates with antiphosphotyrosine antibodies further demonstrated that at least part of the in situ phosphorylation was on tyrosine residues. This does not, however, preclude the possibility of the stimulated phosphorylation of amino acids other than tyrosine.

Previous reports indicated a potential role for lyn in signal transduction pathways used by cytokine receptors such as GM-CSF,
 The current studies extend these observations and indicate that lyn plays a similar pivotal role in the excitation-response coupling sequence associated with chemotactic factor receptors and also during phagocytosis. The agonists tested interact with differing types of receptors (G protein-coupled receptors for chemotactic factors, cytokine receptor for GM-CSF, CD11b/CD 18 integrins for zymosan, FcγR for opsonized bacteria): however, they all stimulate the activity of lyn. Furthermore, in nearly all cases, a good correlation was found between the kinetics of activation of the kinase and the stimulation of the cellular levels of tyrosine phosphorylation. A somewhat anomalous situation was observed with zymosan, in which case the activation of lyn preceded that of the tyrosine phosphorylation (results not shown). In various other systems, lyn has been shown to associate with neutrophil tyrosine phosphorylated substrates such as MAP kinase
63
 and paxillin,
64
 or to interact with cellular elements such as microtubules,
65
 which have been shown to be involved in the tyrosine phosphorylation responses of neutrophils to specific agonists such as inflammatory microcrystals.
32
 Although the demonstration of the activation of lyn is consistent with the hypothesis that this kinase plays a role in the stimulation of tyrosine phosphorylation in intact neutrophils, and in that of the substrates mentioned above, this interpretation remains to be directly tested. Furthermore, while the activation of lyn belongs to a step common to the activation pathways of chemotactic factors and cytokines, it is quite likely that it is reached by different mechanisms by these two classes of agonists, which use fundamentally different coupling mechanisms.

While the activation of lyn apparently represents a step shared by various types of neutrophil agonists, the differences in the end cellular responses elicited indicate that other kinases and or signaling pathways provide the required specificity. Previous data point to some potential candidates. For example, chemotactic factors are potent activators of phospholipase C (with the attendant mobilization of calcium and activation of protein kinase C). while GM-CSF is without effect on this transduction pathway.
66
 Furthermore, recent data have described the activation of several other tyrosine kinases by individual neutrophil agonists: eg, syk by concanavalin A,
33
 fgr by TNFα,
18
 yes by GM-CSF.
50
 The differences in the patterns of tyrosine phosphorylation induced by the agonists tested in this studies strongly indicate that different combinations of kinases and/or phosphatases are activated and/inactivated. These have clearly been demonstrated in a variety of cell types including hematopoeitic cells such as T and B cells.
 Furthermore, positive as well as negative mutual influences among the various kinases have also been observed. For example, increases in lyn have been noted in hck(-/-) mice, the macrophage of which show impaired phagocytic responses.
 It is therefore conceivable that the specific functional response elicited depends on the particular combination of pathways and kinases activated by each agonist. The resolution of this issue will require, inter alia, the examination of the complete pattern of tyrosine kinase activation by each of the classes of neutrophil agonists.