Background
The membrane permeability transition of mitochondria has been suggested to be involved in toxic and oxidative forms of cell injury. Mitochondrial dysfunction is considered to play a critical role in neurodegeneration in Parkinson's disease. Despite the suggestion that indole β-carbolines may be neurotoxic, these compounds provide a protective effect against cytotoxicity of other neurotoxins. In addition, the effect of indole β-carbolines on change in the mitochondrial membrane permeability due to reactive nitrogen species (RNS), which may lead to cell death, has not been clarified.

Methods
Differentiated PC12 cells were used as the experimental culture model for the investigation of neuronal cell injury, which occurs in Parkinson's disease. The effect of indole β-carbolines (harmalol and harmine) on differentiated PC12 cells against toxicity of S-nitroso-N-acetyl-DL-penicillamine (SNAP) was determined by measuring the effect on the change in transmembrane potential, cytochrome c release, formation of ROS, GSH contents, caspase-3 activity and cell viability, and was compared to that of R-(-)-deprenyl.

Results
Specific inhibitors of caspases (z-LEHD.fmk, z-DQMD.fmk) and antioxidants (N-acetylcysteine, dithiothreitol, melatonin, carboxy-PTIO and uric acid) depressed cell death in PC12 cells due to SNAP. β-Carbolines and R-(-)-deprenyl attenuated the SNAP-induced cell death and GSH depletion concentration dependently with a maximal inhibitory effect at 25-50 µM. The compounds inhibited the nuclear damage, decrease in mitochondrial transmembrane potential, cytochrome c release and formation of reactive oxygen species caused by SNAP in PC12 cells. β-Carbolines and R-(-)-deprenyl attenuated the H2O2-induced cell death and depletion of GSH.

Conclusions
The results suggest that indole β-carbolines attenuate the SNAP-induced viability loss in PC12 cells by inhibition of change in the mitochondrial membrane permeability, which may be caused by free radicals. Indole β-carbolines appear to exert a protective effect against the nitrogen species-mediated neuronal cell injury in Parkinson's disease comparable to R-(-)-deprenyl.