Introduction
About 30–40% of the type 2 diabetes mellitus patients develop nephropathy. The number of patients with end-stage renal failure requiring dialysis is increasing. Therefore, suitable animal models that exhibit progressive renal lesions are necessary to investigate the mechanisms underlying a slowly developing human diabetic nephropathy and to develop potential drugs for the treatment of renal complications.

There are some rodent models that exhibit features of the early stage of human diabetic nephropathy, functionally and morphologically [1, 2]. However, most of these models develop these lesions in association not only with diabetic hyperglycemia but also with obesity and hyperlipidemia. In such models, it is not possible to separate the role of prolonged hyperglycemia from that of hyperlipidemia and obesity. Unlike these models, the Goto-Kakizaki (GK) rat [3]has been claimed to be a model of genetic nonobese type 2 diabetes mellitus. It exhibits mild hyperglycemia and structural changes such as glomerular hypertrophy and thickening of glomerular basement membrane [4]. These characteristics are seen during the early stage of human diabetic nephropathy [5]. However, GK rats do not exhibit obvious alterations in renal function or progressive morphological changes, at least at about 8 months of age [4]. These changes have not been observed even by treating the rats with some initiators to promote renal injury [6, 7]. In humans, proteinuria [8, 9], glomerulosclerosis, and tubulointerstitial injury [10, 11]are the characteristics of the progressive stage of diabetic nephropathy which may not occur, until hyperglycemia persists for a long period of time.

The aim of the present study was to examine the functional and morphological changes in the kidneys in GK rats observed for more prolonged periods than described in previous studies and the role of prolonged hyperglycemia and aging. We show that GK rats at a late stage of their life exhibit renal lesions similar to those of human diabetic nephropathy.

Materials and Methods
Animals
Male GK rats (CLEA Japan, Tokyo, Japan) and age-matched male Wistar rats (CLEA Japan) were used. The experiments conformed to the standards of the Pharmaceutical Research Laboratory of Toray Industries, Inc.

Experiments
Urine was collected in bottles from rats aged 8, 12, and 24 months that were kept in metabolic cages for 24 h. Urine was subjected to analysis of total protein (Micro TP test kit; Wako, Osaka, Japan) and creatinine (Creatinine HA test kit; Wako), using commercially available enzyme assay kits. Blood was obtained from the tail vein, and the serum was used for analysis of creatinine (Creatinine HA test kit), blood urea nitrogen (BUN; Urea Nitrogen B test kit; Wako), and glucose (Glucose C test kit; Wako), using enzyme assay kits.

Processing Kidneys for Morphological and Immunohistochemical Evaluation
At 8, 12, and 24 months of age, 4 or 5 rats were sacrificed by exsanguination from the abdominal aorta under ether anesthesia. The left kidney of each animal was removed and fixed in 10% formalin in phosphate buffer (pH 7.4). Paraffin-embedded sections were stained with periodic acid-Schiff.

Immunohistochemical Study
Antihuman alpha smooth muscle actin (SMA) mouse monoclonal antibody (×200; Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), antimouse type IV collagen rabbit antiserum (×2,000; LSL, Tokyo, Japan), and antirat ED-1 mouse monoclonal antibody (×400; Serotec, Kidlington, UK) were used.

For immunohistochemical staining, deparaffinized sections were pretreated with 0.1% trypsin (for α-SMA and ED-1, 20 min at 37°C; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, Calif., USA) or 0.5% type XXIV protease (for type IV collagen, 15 min at room temperature; Sigma Aldrich Chemie, Deisenhofen, Germany). Endogenous peroxidase was quenched by immersion in 0.3% hydrogen peroxidase in methanol for 20 min. After treatment with blocking solution (Protein Block serum free; Dako) for 30 min, sections were sequentially incubated with primary antibody (overnight at 4°C), secondary antibody (15 min at room temperature; LSAB®2 kit, Dako), and peroxidase-conjugated streptavidin (15 min at room temperature; LSAB® 2 kit). These antigens were visualized using peroxidase substrate (diaminobenzidine) as the chromogen. For all studies, negative controls were included, with substitution of the primary antibodies with normal serum.

Semiquantitation
Glomerular lesions were graded according to the severity of sclerosis for each glomerulus from 0 to 4+ as follows: 0 = no lesion, 1+ = expansion of mesangial area was observed but no glomerulosclerosis, 2+ = sclerosis <50%, 3+ = sclerosis 50–75%, and 4+ = sclerosis >75% of glomerular tuft (fig. 1). The histological score of glomerular lesions was obtained by averaging the scores from 200 glomeruli in one section. Tubulointerstitial fibrosis was graded according to the area of injury from 0 to 5+ as follows: 0 = no lesion, 1+ = <10%, 2+ = 10–25%, 3+ = 25–50%, 4+ = 50–75%, and 5+ = >75% of the cortex in one section.
The expression of α-SMA in each glomerulus was scored according to the area of positive expression from 0 to 4+ as follows: 0 = absent, 1+ = <10%, 2+ = 10–25%, 3+ = 25–75%, and 4+ = >75% of the glomerulus. The expression of type IV collagen in each glomerulus was scored according to the area of positive expression from 0 to 4+ as follows: 0 = absent, 1+ = only in normal mesangial area, 2+ = <25%, 3+ = 25–75%, and 4+ = >75% of the glomerulus. The glomerular score was obtained by averaging the scores from 100 glomeruli in one section. Immunoreactive signals for tubulointerstitial α-SMA and type IV collagen were observed in 20 randomly chosen high-power fields (×50) and scored according to the area of positive expression from 0 to 4+ as follows: 0 = absent, 1+ = <25%, 2+ = 25–50%, 3+ = 50–75%, and 4+ = >75% of the cortex in one section.

The degree of macrophage infiltration in glomeruli was expressed by averaging the number of ED-1-positive cells from 100 glomeruli in one section. The degree of macrophage infiltration in the tubulointerstitium was expressed by counting the number of ED-1-positive cells in 20 randomly chosen high-power fields (×50).

All sections were examined without knowledge of the experimental protocol.

Statistical Analysis
All values are expressed as mean ± SE. Statistical significance was assessed by Anova and t test. Nonparametric data were compared by Wilcoxon tests. p < 0.05 was considered to be significant.

Results
Renal Functional Changes
Hyperglycemia was seen at 8 months of age and persisted up to 24 months of age in GK rats. The excretion of urinary protein in GK rats was increased only at 24 months of age. In addition, it tended to be higher (about 1.5-fold) than that in age-matched Wistar rats. No significant change was seen in creatinine clearance and BUN up to 24 months of age in both GK and Wistar rats (table 1).
Renal Morphological Changes
In GK rats, a slight proliferation of mesangial cells was observed in some glomeruli at 8 months of age, and the number of glomeruli in which proliferation of mesangial cells was observed, was increased at 12 months of age. No obvious change was seen in tubules up to 12 months of age. At 24 months of age, prominent morphological changes, including segmental glomerulosclerosis, proliferation of mesangial cells, atrophy, dilatation, basement membrane thickening and interstitial fibrosis of tubules, and inflammatory cell infiltration, which were similar to the findings in human diabetic nephropathy, were observed (fig. 2a). Moreover, the glomerular volume in GK rats seemed to be larger during all experimental periods than that in age-matched Wistar rats (fig. 2). This is consistent with the results reported by Phillips et al. [4]. On the other hand, in Wistar rats, a slight proliferation of mesangial cells was observed in a few glomeruli only just at 12 months of age. Even at 24 months of age, only mild tubular lesions and a slight proliferation of mesangial cells in some glomeruli were seen. Additionally, the grade of glomerular lesions was statistically significantly higher than that in age-matched Wistar rats (fig. 3a). Tubulointerstitial fibrosis in GK rats seemed to be more extensive than that in age-matched Wistar rats (fig. 2, 3b), although the difference was not statistically significant.
Immunohistochemical Study
Assessment of Renal Cellular Damage. A prominent α-SMA-positive area was observed in both glomerular and tubulointerstitial lesions in GK rats. The positive area in the tubulointerstitium had expanded at 24 months of age, and that in the glomerulus expanded with the progression of glomerular lesions in GK rats (fig. 4a, b; fig. 5). Additionally, the expression of α-SMA in the tubulointerstitium at 24 months of age in GK rats was statistically significantly more extensive than that in age-matched Wistar rats (fig. 4b, c; fig. 5b).
Extracellular Matrix Accumulation. Type IV collagen was overexpressed in the glomerulosclerotic and tubulointerstitial lesions in GK rats. The expression of type IV collagen in the glomerulus was normal in mesangial cells from 8 months of age, and a positive area expanded at 24 months of age in GK rats (fig. 6a, b; fig. 7a). However, it did not expand in Wistar rats (fig. 6c; fig. 7a). Expression in the tubulointerstitium expanded at 24 months of age in GK rats (fig. 6a, b; fig. 7b). On the contrary, the expression in the tubulointerstitium in Wistar rats at 24 months of age was statistically significantly lower than that in age-matched GK rats (fig. 6b, c; fig. 7b).
Macrophage Infiltration. In parallel to the progression of nephropathy, infiltration of ED-1-positive cells became evident in the areas of glomerulosclerosis and tubulointerstitial lesions in GK rats (fig. 8a, b). In addition, infiltration of ED-1-positive cells in the glomerulosclerotic area was especially prominent and statistically significant as compared with that in Wistar rats at 24 months of age (fig. 8b, c; fig. 9).
Discussion
In this study, we used nonobese GK rats to examine the renal consequences of a prolonged diabetic state such as hyperglycemia and to reveal a similarity to human diabetic nephropathy. Some investigators reported that although structural changes such as glomerular hypertrophy and thickening of the glomerular basement membrane, which are seen during the early stage of human diabetic nephropathy, were observed in the kidneys of GK rats at 8 months of age, they showed no progression at the age of 12 months [4]. Our present study substantially extended the observation period under prolonged hyperglycemia and revealed that GK rats showed a functional and a morphological progression in the kidneys.

The functional and morphological features of human diabetic nephropathy include increased glomerular hyperfiltration [12], defects of glomerular filtration [13], microalbuminuria [8, 9], and morphological alterations such as glomerulosclerosis and tubulointerstitial fibrosis [10, 11]. These features are thought to be associated with an impaired metabolism of glucose or other factors by exposing renal cells to a diabetic state such as prolonged hyperglycemia. In vitro studies revealed that high glucose levels activate a polyol pathway in mesangial and proximal tubular cells that synthesizes cytokines, stimulating the gene expression of matrix constituents such as type IV collagen in these cells [14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. Morphological alterations such as myofibroblast accumulation in the mesangium occurred at an early stage, accompanying this process. Myofibroblasts, activated mesangial cells, and interstitial fibroblasts expressing α-SMA contribute to abnormal matrix production and play a role in the pathogenesis of both glomerulosclerosis and tubulointerstitial fibrosis [18, 19, 20, 21, 22]. Macrophages also promote extracellular matrix proteins to result in glomerulosclerosis and interstitial fibrosis [23, 24].

In our present study, hyperglycemia persisted during the experimental period which confirmed that GK rats were exposed to prolonged hyperglycemia.

Morphological changes such as glomerulosclerosis, proliferation of mesangial cells, tubulointerstitial fibrosis, atrophy, dilatation, basement membrane thickening of tubules, and inflammatory cell infiltration were observed in the kidneys of GK rats at 24 months of age. In addition, progressive de novo expression of α-SMA, which is specifically expressed in activated mesangial cells and interstitial fibroblasts [19], and overexpression of type IV collagen, as a marker of extracellular matrix formation, similarly occurred in glomerulus and tubulointerstitium after 1 year of age in GK rats. Macrophage infiltration also increased in parallel with the progression of renal lesions in GK rats. This observation is consistent with the concept that the density of infiltrating mononuclear cells in the renal interstitium correlates well with declining renal function [23, 25]. These histopathological features in the kidneys of GK rats were similar to those of human diabetic nephropathy, although nodular glomerulosclerosis was not observed within the experimental period in GK rats. On the contrary, in Wistar rats, from which GK rats were derived, morphological alterations, expression of α-SMA and type IV collagen, and macrophage infiltration in glomeruli and tubulointerstitium were almost much less than in GK rats at 24 months of age. Though the glomerular score was not statistically different in morphological analysis, the extent of glomerular lesions was different between GK and Wistar rats. Namely, a slight proliferation of mesangial cells is seen (average score 0.7) even at 24 months of age in Wistar rats; on the contrary, some segmental glomerulosclerosis developed in GK rats (average score 1.7).

Moreover, the excretion of urinary protein in GK rats, which is a parameter of glomerular and tubular alterations, was increased after 1 year of age. Although the age-related excretion of urinary protein was increased in age-matched Wistar rats, it did not involve progressive glomerular lesions. Namely, the glomeruli in Wistar rats exhibited only minor lesions with no progression.

These results suggest that the functional and morphological features observed in the kidneys of GK rats were not caused by nonspecific aging processes, but by prolonged exposure to a diabetic state, especially hyperglycemia. Although we did not quantify the insulin levels in GK and Wistar rats, it is possible that the persistence of high insulin levels is correlated with the evolution of renal disease [26]. Despite these pathological and functional changes in GK rats, creatinine clearance and BUN, which are important parameters in the assessment of end-stage renal failure, did not worsen within the experimental period as compared with control Wistar rats, even at 24 months of age. Hyperlipidemia is probably needed as a secondary factor to induce additional renal injury, because high-fat diets deteriorated the glucose metabolism in diabetic rats [27]. However, the body weight in GK rats was constant after about 10 months of age, and no evidence of obesity was noted. In addition, our preliminary study found that hypertension was not observed in GK rats even at 24 months of age. One reason may be the fact that rat models would not produce severe hypertension which is commonly seen in the progressive stage of human diabetic nephropathy, without some treatment such as high-sodium diets [28]. Therefore, additional factors such as hyperlipidemia and hypertension might have exacerbated renal failure.

Our long-term study showed that GK rats exhibit functional and morphological features of the kidney which are similar to those of progressive human diabetic nephropathy, and we conclude that prolonged hyperglycemia may play a crucial role in inducing progressive diabetic nephropathy in human type 2 diabetes and that aging and obesity are probably additional factors to exacerbate renal injury.