INTRODUCTION
Streptomyces is a genus of Gram-positive filamentous soil bacteria well known for their ability to produce antibiotics and other molecules useful as therapeutic or phytosanitary agents in medicine or agriculture (1, 2). On solid media, antibiotic biosynthesis (metabolic differentiation) correlates temporally with the formation of aerial mycelium (morphological differentiation) (3). In liquid media, antibiotic biosynthesis usually takes place when growth slows down or stops (stationary phase) (4). In both cases, antibiotic biosynthesis is thought to be triggered by some nutritional limitation, with phosphate limitation being an important trigger for antibiotic biosynthesis (5, 6). The regulation of antibiotic biosynthesis is highly complex (3). It involves pleiotropic regulators (affecting or not affecting morphological differentiation) that govern either directly or indirectly the expression of specific regulators usually linked to the biosynthetic pathways under their control (7). Interestingly, the model strain Streptomyces lividans TK24 has the genetic capability to produce three well-known secondary metabolites: the calcium dependent antibiotic CDA, synthesized from Asp, Asn, Trp, Thr, Ser, Gly, hydroxyphenyl-Gly, Glu, methyl-Glu, and acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) precursors (8, 9), the red-pigmented cell-associated undecylprodigiosin RED, synthesized from Gly, Pro, Ser, and acetyl-CoA precursors (10, 11), and the blue-pigmented secreted actinorhodin (ACT), synthesized from acetyl-CoA (12). This strain, which produces these antibiotics in low titers under normal laboratory conditions, was converted into an antibiotic-overproducing strain, similar in that respect to Streptomyces coelicolor M145, through the disruption of the ppk gene, but only under conditions of Pi limitation (13). Under these specific conditions, Ppk thus somehow negatively controls antibiotic biosynthesis. ppk encodes an enzyme able to act, in vitro, either as a polyphosphate kinase (PPK), polymerizing the γ phosphate of ATP into polyphosphate, or as an adenosyl diphosphate kinase (ADPK), regenerating ATP from ADP and polyphosphate, depending on the ATP/ADP ratio in the reaction mix (13). In vivo, this enzyme is mainly expressed under Pi limitation (14), conditions known to correlate with a low ATP content (15). Under these conditions, Ppk was shown to act mainly as an ADPK, regenerating ATP from ADP and polyphosphates (C. Esnault et al., unpublished data). Ppk thus plays an important role in maintaining the energetic homeostasis of the cell under conditions of Pi limitation. Its absence in the ppk mutant is thus expected to lead to a severe energetic stress (deficit in ATP). However, the connection between this energetic stress and the triggering of antibiotic biosynthesis remains poorly understood. In an attempt to get a better understanding of this connection, the proteomes of the wild-type (wt) and ppk mutant strains of S. lividans TK24, grown for 96 h on the solid medium R2YE with no Pi added (high C/N ratio and phosphate limitation), were analyzed. Intracellular proteins were extracted and separated on two-dimensional (2D) gels, spots were quantified, and those showing a 3-fold variation or more were identified by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization–time of flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry, using the peptide mass fingerprint method. Forty-one proteins differentially regulated in the ppk mutant strain in comparison to the wild-type strain were identified. Analysis of the results suggested that the degradation of storage lipids, known to be mainly triacylglycerol (TAG) in Streptomyces (16, 17), was favored compared to glucose catabolism in the ppk mutant. This assumption was confirmed by the visualization of cytoplasmic lipid vesicles known to contain TAG using transmission electron microscopy (EM) and by the quantification of the relative TAG content of the wt and ppk mutant strains of S. lividans TK24 and of S. coelicolor M145 using thin-layer chromatography (TLC).

Go to:
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Bacterial strains and growth conditions. Spores of S. lividans TK24, its ppk mutant (13), and S. coelicolor M145 were prepared from SFM medium (18), and 106 spores of each strain were spread on the surfaces of cellophane disks (Focus Packaging & Design Ltd., Louth, United Kingdom) laid on the top of agar plates of the rich medium R2YE with no addition of phosphate salts (Pi limitation) (18). The plates were incubated at 30°C for 96 h.
Preparation of the soluble protein fractions. After 96 h, cells were harvested with a spatula, washed with 5 ml of buffer containing 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.9), 10 mM NaCl, and 1 mM EDTA (Tris-buffered saline [TBS]), and centrifuged (12,000 × g) for 10 min at 4°C. Pellets were resuspended in 1 ml of TBS containing a cocktail of antiproteases (Sigma; 1 ml for 0.5 g of mycelium). Cells were then disrupted by 3 cycles of 10 s of sonication (Branson Sonifier). Coarse debris was removed by centrifugation (10,000 × g) for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was collected and centrifuged (150,000 × g) for 45 min at 4°C. At this point, the total protein concentration in the supernatant was estimated by using the Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA).
Two-dimensional electrophoresis. Proteins (0.8 mg) were precipitated with 10% (wt/vol) trichloroacetic acid for at least 1 h at 4°C and pelleted by centrifugation (17,000 × g) for 15 min at 4°C. Pellets were washed with cold acetone, neutralized through 2 washes with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and then with H2O, and immediately resuspended in 2D buffer containing 8 M urea, 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 4% (wt/vol) 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)-dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS), 0.2% (wt/vol) biolytes, and 0.001% bromophenol blue. The samples were applied to 17-cm pH 4 to 7 IPG strips (Bio-Rad), and passive gel rehydration was carried out at 20°C for 14 to 16 h. Similar gel loading (±15% maximum) of proteins from wt and mutant cells was checked by quantification of protein in the sample solution prior to IPG strip rehydration as well as in the residual volume left after rehydration using the Ettan 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare, San Francisco, CA, USA). Gels were focused using a Protean isoelectric focusing (IEF) cell (Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer's instructions. In the second dimension, proteins were separated in a homogeneous 12% SDS-PAGE slab gel (20 by 20 cm, 1-mm thickness) using a Bio-Rad vertical Protean II xi chamber. The running conditions were 25 V for an hour and then 30 mA per gel, and proteins were stained with colloidal Coomassie blue G-250. IEF gels with various pI ranges (4 to 7, 5 to 8, and 3 to 10 nonlinear) were tested, and the pI 4 to 7 range was chosen as the best one for the intracellular protein extracts from S. lividans.
Image analysis of 2D gels. We used the 2D gel analysis software PDQuest (version 7.2.0) from Bio-Rad for spot quantification and statistical analysis of the observed changes. Gels were scanned with a GS-800 densitometer (Bio-Rad). Spot intensity was obtained in ppm and normalized to the total density of the gel. The data set was obtained from 5 wt and 5 ppk gels. In all cases, gel pairs were obtained from 5 independent mycelial preparations. The result for each spot is expressed as the ratio between ppk spot intensity and wt spot intensity for overexpressed proteins and as the opposite ratio for underexpressed proteins. Results are reported as a mean value calculated from the data sets. The standard deviation of the analysis was below 20%. Gel spots showing quantitatively (at least 3-fold) and statistically significant variations (determined by Student's test with a P value of 0.02) were excised and identified.
In situ proteolysis, MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry analysis, and identification. Gel spots were cut and destained, proteins digested with trypsin, and peptides extracted as described in reference 19. One microliter of peptide sample was mixed at a 1:1 ratio with a saturated solution of α-cyano-hydroxycinnamic acid in 0.3% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)–50% acetonitrile. The premix was deposited on a standard stainless steel target and allowed to air dry. MALDI mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a Voyager-DE-STR MALDI mass spectrometer equipped with a 337-nm laser source (Perseptive Biosystems, Framingham, PA, USA). Spectra were recorded in the positive-ion reflectron mode, with a 20-kV acceleration voltage in the ion source. External calibration was applied based on a mixture of 6 reference peptides covering the m/z 900- to 3,700-Da range. Database searching was performed against the sequence databases of NCBI, restricted to bacterial species, using the AlDente and Mascot (Matrix Science, Boston, MA) programs. The criteria for searching were set at 75-ppm mass accuracy, up to 2 missed cleavages, possible oxidation of methionine, and cysteine modified by carbamidomethylation.
Assay of actinorhodin production. Dry biomass and extracellular ACT were quantified from four individual plates (52-mm diameter) for each strain after 96 h of incubation at 30°C. To quantify ACT, a volume of R2YE agar medium corresponding to an individual plate was cut into small pieces and allowed to diffuse in 5 ml water for 2 h at 4°C. The first eluate was transferred into a new tube, and 5 ml of water was added again to the agar medium and allowed to diffuse for 2 h at 4°C. The two eluates (10 ml) were pooled, and 0.5 ml of 4 M HCl was added to 1.5 ml of the final eluate. The mixture was incubated on ice for 10 min to allow ACT precipitation. Precipitated ACT was collected by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 10 min. The resulting pellet was diluted in 1 ml of KOH (1 N), and the optical density at 640 nm (OD640) of the solution was determined (18). The quantity of ACT excreted was expressed as nanomoles per milligram of dry biomass. The mean values ± standard deviations were calculated (n = 4).
Transmission electron microscopy. S. lividans TK24 (wt and ppk mutant) and S. coelicolor M145 were grown as lawns for 96 h on the surface of a cellophane disk deposited on the surface of R2YE agar. Mycelial samples were fixed by incubation in fixative solution (2% [vol/vol] glutaraldehyde plus 2% [vol/vol] paraformaldehyde [Electron Microscopy Sciences, Washington, PA, USA] in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer, pH 7.2 [Fluka, Switzerland]) for 3 h at room temperature and then overnight at 4°C. After four washes in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer (pH 7.2), the samples were postfixed in 1% osmium tetroxide (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Washington, PA, USA) in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer (pH 7.2) for 60 min at room temperature. Samples were rinsed four times in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer (pH 7.2) and then four times in water. The samples were then dehydrated by 20 min of incubation in a series of ethanol baths with increasing ethanol concentrations (30, 50, 70, 80, and 90%) before embedding in epoxy resin (Epikote 812; Fluka, Switzerland) (20). Ultrathin sections (70 nm) were cut with an ultramicrotome (Ultracut; Leica, Austria). These sections were treated with 5% uranyl acetate and 0.2% lead citrate for contrast (71). The sections were observed by transmission electron microscopy at 80 kV (EM 208; Philips, The Netherlands). Digital images were acquired using a charge-coupled-device (CCD) camera (Advantage HR3 AMT-Hamamatsu).
Lipid extraction and analysis using TLC. Total lipids of the three strains of interest grown for 96 h on R2YE limited in Pi were extracted from 20 mg of lyophilized mycelium for thin-layer chromatography (TLC) analysis using the procedure of Folch et al. (21) (using a 2:1 chloroform-methanol mixture). Precoated TLC plates (silica G60; 20 by 20 cm, 0.25-mm thickness) from Merck (Germany) were used. Lipid classes were separated with a two-development solvent system. System A (half-plate migration) consisted of petroleum ether-ethyl ether-acetic acid at 20:20:0.8 (vol/vol/vol). System B (whole-plate migration) consisted of petroleum ether-diethyl ether at 49:1 (vol/vol). Lipid classes were visualized by the MnCl2 charring method (22). The silica plate was incubated for 1 min in a solution containing 120 ml of methanol, 120 ml of water, 0.8 g of MnCl2, and 8 ml of sulfuric acid and then heated in an oven at 100°C until the appearance of dark lipid spots. Lipid identification was based upon migration obtained for lipid standards (Sigma-Aldrich). Lipid staining was recorded and quantified using the LAS-3000 imaging system and MultiGauge software from Fujifilm.
Go to:
RESULTS
Proteomic studies. In Streptomyces, antibiotic production usually takes place late in growth, during stationary phase, when growth is weak or null. We therefore decided to perform the proteomic investigation at 96 h, when antibiotic production is well established and maximal. Mycelial lawns of the wild-type strain of S. lividans TK24 and its ppk mutant were grown for 96 h on the surface of a cellophane disk laid on the surface of solid R2YE medium with no Pi added. The mycelium was collected, and a step of thorough washing of the mycelium was added to the standard protocol in order to remove most of the secreted proteins and focus on cytoplasmic proteins. More than 700 proteins could be visualized on the IEF gels (pI 4 to 7 range). For the comparison of the 2D maps from wt and ppk mutant strains of S. lividans, only spots whose abundance was modified by a factor of at least 3 were selected in order to highlight the most significant processes affected. Figure 1 shows an example of the gels of the proteins extracted from both strains. We focused on 88 spots: 28 and 60 showed increased and reduced levels, respectively, in the ppk mutant strain. All these were analyzed by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry and identified by their peptide mass fingerprint. The S. lividans genome has been sequenced but is not fully annotated yet (http://www.broadinstitute.org/annotation/genome/streptomyces_group/MultiDownloads.html). However, the close identity between S. lividans and the fully sequenced and annotated S. coelicolor genome (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/resources/downloads/bacteria/streptomyces-coelicolor.html) allowed us to identify most of the proteins. Ten spots contained a mixture of proteins and thus were excluded from the quantitative comparison, and 22 gave noninformative spectra. In conclusion, 41 proteins were identified as being differentially expressed in the two strains, with the expression of 12 proteins being upregulated in the ppk mutant strain and that of 29 proteins being downregulated (Table 1). None of the proteins were annotated as secreted proteins, confirming the efficiency of the washing procedure. Most of the selected proteins could be classified as belonging to different groups, in accordance with KEGG metabolic pathways. We had problems assigning functions to only four proteins.
(i) Carbon metabolism. (a) Glycolytic metabolism. The results in Table 1 indicated smaller amounts of three proteins in the ppk mutant than in the wt strain. One of these proteins is a phosphoglucomutase (SCO7443) that catalyzes the conversion of glucose-1-phosphate (likely originating from glycogen degradation) into glucose-6-phosphate. The other two are glycolytic enzymes of the upper part of glycolysis, a fructose-bisphosphate aldolase (SCO3649, step 4) that cleaves fructose-1,6-bisphosphate into the two triose phosphates, dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (GA3P), and a triose phosphate isomerase (SCO1945, step 5) that catalyzes the interconversion between DHAP and GA3P.
In contrast, the amounts of two proteins belonging to the lower part of glycolysis were higher (3- to 4-fold) in the ppk mutant than in the wild-type strain. These were a glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (SCO1947, step 6) that catalyzes the conversion of GA3P into 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate and an enolase (SCO3096, step 9) that catalyzes the conversion of 2-phosphoglycerate into phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP). Unexpectedly, enzymes thought to be part of the pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) complex (dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase-like enzymes SCO2180, SCO0884, and SCO4919) catalyzing the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA were shown to be less abundant in the ppk mutant than in the wt strain.

(b) Lipid/fatty acid metabolism. An acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (SCO3051) that catalyzes the first step of the beta-oxidation of fatty acids, whose end product is acetyl-CoA, was 4-fold more abundant in the ppk mutant than in the wt strain. Whereas numerous proteins annotated as being involved in lipid metabolism are present in the genomes of S. lividans and S. coelicolor, few, if any, proteins of this class are seen in published proteomic studies (23, 24). This absence might be partially due to the fact that these proteins are hydrophobic and, as membrane proteins, do not enter the gels and/or are lost in the course of the isolation procedure because of their association with floating lipid bodies. However, two other proteins putatively involved in the beta-oxidation of fatty acids were also detected, and their levels of production were found to be strongly upregulated in 60-h cultures of the ppk mutant (data not shown). These proteins are an enoyl-CoA hydratase (SCO5144, step 2), and an hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (SCO5385, step 3). The step numbers refer to the cycle of beta-oxidation of fatty acids as described in http://oregonstate.edu/instruct/bb350/textmaterials/21/Slide08.jpg.
In contrast, a 4-fold reduction in the level of GlpQ1 (SCO1565), an enzyme hydrolyzing major glycerophospholipids of biological membranes (phosphatidylinositol and phosphatidylserine glycerophosphodiesters) and producing glycerol-3-phosphate (glycerol-3-P) plus the corresponding alcohol, was observed. The expression of sco1565 was shown to be positively controlled by the two-component system (TCS) PhoR/PhoP and severely inhibited by glycerol-3-phosphate or glycerol plus Pi and, to a lesser extent, by serine and inositol, the end products of phosphatidylinositol and phosphatidylserine degradation (25). Interestingly, the production of another enzyme, a putative 5-deoxyglucuronate isomerase (SCO6976), was also downregulated in the ppk mutant. This protein might be involved in catabolism of myo-inositol, possibly originating from membrane lipid degradation. The downregulation of these enzymes possibly involved in phospholipid degradation can perhaps also be correlated with the downregulation of a protein annotated as a xylosidase/arabinosidase (SCO0118) that is likely involved in peptidoglycan degradation. Together, these results suggest that the degradation of cell wall and membrane phospholipids is less active in the ppk mutant strain than in the wild-type strain.

(ii) Phosphate metabolism. A 4-fold overexpression of two proteins belonging to the Pho regulon, PstS (26) and PhoU (27), was observed in the ppk mutant strain. These two genes are known to be under the positive control of the two-component system (TCS) PhoR/PhoP (28), which positively autocontrols its own expression under conditions of phosphate limitation (29). PstS (SCO4142) is the periplasmic phosphate binding protein part of the high-affinity phosphate ABC transporter encoded by the pstSCAB operon (26, 30). The metalloprotein PhoU (SCO4248) is encoded by a gene located in divergence to the phoR/phoP TCS genes. Its function remains unclear, but it is annotated as a phosphate transport regulator and might also be involved in the resistance to oxidative stress (27). The upregulation of these genes positively regulated by PhoR/PhoP is consistent with our previous studies which demonstrated that expression of the TCS PhoR/PhoP was dramatically increased in the ppk mutant (29).
In contrast, three other proteins connected to phosphate metabolism were shown to be 3- to 4-fold less abundant in the ppk mutant than in the wt strain. These are PhoX, a presumed secreted phosphatase encoded by sco3790 (31, 32), an inorganic pyrophosphatase encoded by sco0118 (33, 34), and the putative glycerophosphoryldiester phosphatase (SCO1565) mentioned above. These results suggested that the regulation of these proteins is complex and likely involves one or more regulators in addition to PhoP.

(iii) Nitrogen and amino acid metabolism. Two enzymes of nitrogen metabolism were found to be more abundant in the ppk mutant than in the wt strain: a delta-1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenase (SCO5520) that catalyzes the second step of proline catabolism, yielding glutamate, and a glutamine synthetase GlnA (SCO2198) that catalyzes the formation of glutamine from glutamate, ATP, and ammonia (35). On the other hand, the glutamate binding protein involved in glutamate uptake (SCO5776) was less abundant in the ppk mutant. These results suggest that in the ppk mutant strain, glutamate is not directly taken up from the medium but rather originates from the catabolism of proline, the most abundant amino acid in R2YE medium. These observations suggest that the ppk mutant might import and catabolize proline (a nitrogen source) present in the growth medium more actively than the wild-type strain.
In contrast, the levels of three other enzymes of amino acid metabolism were downregulated in the ppk mutant strain. These were SCO1173, an NAD+-dependent l-alanine dehydrogenase catalyzing the reversible conversion of l-alanine into pyruvate and NH3, SCO2147, an anthranilate phosphoribosyl transferase that is thought to be involved in tryptophan metabolism, and SCO5976, an ornithine carbamoyltransferase thought to be involved in the arginine-degradative pathway yielding citrulline.

(iv) Nucleotide metabolism. The expression of a polynucleotide phosphorylase (SCO5737), an enzyme involved in RNA degradation (36, 37), was shown to be lower in the ppk mutant than in the wt strain. In contrast, an enzyme of purine metabolism, an inositol-5′-monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH) (SCO4771) involved in the conversion of IMP to xanthosine-5′-monophosphate, was shown to be more abundant in the ppk mutant than in the wt strain. This protein is related to guanine nucleoside metabolism and might play a role in the control of the guanine nucleotide pool (GTP). GTP is the precursor of ppGpp synthesis by the RelA protein and is known to be an important trigger for antibiotic biosynthesis (38, 39).
(v) Antibiotic biosynthesis and its regulation. A strongly enhanced (more than 4-fold) amount of ActV4 (SCO5079), involved in actinorhodin biosynthesis, was observed at 96 h. More genes related to this pathway (SCO5073, SCO5078, SCO5079, SCO5088, and SCO5090) were also found to be overexpressed in 60-h cultures of the ppk mutant strain (data not shown).
However, the expression of two putative lipoprotein ABC-type transporters, SCO5113 (BldKB) and SCO5477, was shown to be downregulated in the ppk mutant strain. SCO5113 is thought to be involved in morphological differentiation by allowing the transport of the morphogenic oligopeptide Bld261 (40, 41), whereas the ABC transporters, including SCO5477, were reported to play a role in the upregulation of actinorhodin production by S-adenosylmethionine (42, 43). These transport systems are thought to be involved in triggering antibiotic production. Their downregulation in the ppk mutant is unexpected but might be due to the fact that a late phase of antibiotic production was being studied.

(vi) Response to oxidative stress. A protein (SCO7269) belonging to the DinB (DNA damage-inducible) superfamily (44) and bearing a mycothiol-dependent maleylpyruvate isomerase N-terminal domain was found to be present in larger amounts in the ppk mutant than in the wt strain. Proteins of this family were shown to catalyze thiol-dependent detoxification reactions (45). Mycothiol (the putative cofactor of SCO7269) is the major thiol in actinobacteria (46) and can be considered the equivalent of glutathione in eukaryotes (47). The biosynthesis of mycothiol is regulated by the sigma R factor (48), which transcribes genes responding to thiol-oxidative stress in S. coelicolor (49). In contrast, a protein (SCO0741) annotated as highly similar to Amycolatopsis methanolica NAD/mycothiol-dependent formaldehyde dehydrogenase was less abundant in the ppk mutant than in the wt strain. This enzyme, thought to catalyze the reaction S-(hydroxymethyl) mycothiol + NAD+ → S-formylmycothiol + NADH, might modify mycothiol, altering its antioxidant function. These results suggest that the antioxidant mycothiol is needed in the ppk mutant. Indeed, it was shown that the blue polyketide antibiotic actinorhodin (ACT) is a redox-active compound triggering the expression of the SoxR regulon that fulfills a protective function against the latter (50, 51). In this context, we can speculate that the higher level of SCO7269 and lower level of SCO0741 in the ppk mutant might help the strain to combat endogenous oxidative stress that is possibly linked to ACT overproduction.
Furthermore, three other highly expressed proteins annotated as tellurium resistance proteins (SCO2368, SCO2367, and SCO1903), were shown to be less abundant in the ppk mutant. The S. coelicolor genome contains 17 genes encoding proteins of unknown function with a TerD domain. On the basis of their homology with the protein TerD of Serratia marcescens, these genes were predicted to be involved in tellurite resistance. However, recent studies on SCO2368 indicate that this protein is not involved in tellurium resistance but rather plays an important role in the control of growth rate as well as differentiation (52). Indeed, deletion of sco2368 leads to a higher growth rate and delayed aerial mycelium formation. SCO2368 is also potentially a member of the sigma R regulon, since the consensus motif GGGAA(N18-20)CGTT, which is related to the sigma R binding site, was found in its promoter region (53). Proteins of this family might be involved in the limitation of growth under high oxidative stress in order to minimize mutagenic events occurring under these conditions (54). The ppk mutant is known to grow at a rate similar to that of the wt strain (13), and the lower expression of this protein in the ppk mutant at 96 h is difficult to interpret.

(vii) Iron acquisition systems. Proteins annotated as involved in iron acquisition (SCO1925, SCO1623, SCO2270, and SCO7399) were less abundant in the ppk mutant strain. Under oxidative stress, iron is known to generate reactive free radicals by the Fenton reaction (55) that are damaging for cellular constituents (56–58). The downregulation of such genes in the ppk mutant might be necessary to limit the already high internal oxidative stress of this strain.
(viii) Others. Three other proteins of unknown function, i.e., SCO6492, which bears a tetratricopeptide repeat, a motif important in protein assembly, and two prophage-like proteins (SCO4244 and SCO4253) were less abundant in the ppk mutant strain than in the wt strain, whereas SCO1113, a protein that contains BNR-like repeats, suggesting that it may act as a sialidase (glycosyl hydrolase), was more abundant in the ppk mutant.
The hypothesis and its experimental validation. Our results revealed that in the ppk mutant of S. lividans TK24, two enzymes of the upper part of glycolysis (SCO7443 and SCO3649) were less abundant, whereas two enzymes of the lower part of glycolysis, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (SCO1947) and enolase (SCO3096) and enzymes of the beta-oxidation of fatty acids (SCO3051, SCO5144, and SCO5385) were more abundant. Careful analysis of our results in the light of previous literature reports (59, 60) suggested that active degradation of triacylglycerols (TAGs) might take place in the ppk mutant strain (Fig. 2). This would yield glycerol, catabolized via the lower part of glycolysis, and fatty acids, degraded to acetyl-CoA, the precursor of actinorhodin biosynthesis.
In order to test this hypothesis, the TAG contents of the wt and the ppk mutant strains of S. lividans TK24 as well as of S. coelicolor M145, a strain well known to overproduce the polyketide antibiotic actinorhodin (Fig. 3A), were assessed using transmission electron microscopy and thin-layer chromatography (TLC). Transmission electron microscopy pictures (Fig. 3B) clearly showed that the mycelial fragments of the wt strain of S. lividans contain numerous lipid vesicles known to consist mainly of TAG (16, 17), whereas those of the ppk mutant of S. lividans and of S. coelicolor contain far fewer and hardly any lipid vesicles, respectively. In order to confirm the visual impression of differences in the TAG contents of these three strains, total lipid was extracted from lyophilized mycelia of the wt and ppk mutant strains of S. lividans TK24 and of S. coelicolor M145 grown under the same conditions as described above and was analyzed by TLC. The results (Fig. 3C) clearly show that the only lipids whose abundance varies among strains are the TAGs, and the difference in the TAG contents of the different strains was confirmed. Relative quantification of the TAG spots using MultiGauge indicated that S. coelicolor M145 and the ppk mutant of S. lividans TK24 contain roughly 50% and 30% less TAG than the wt strain of S. lividans TK24, respectively. S. coelicolor M145 also excreted approximately 2.5-fold more ACT than the ppk mutant (Fig. 3A).
DISCUSSION
Nearly 20 years ago, TAG vesicles were observed in the cytoplasm of S. lividans TK24 by Olukoshi and Packter (16, 17). These authors suggested the existence of intricate links between TAG metabolism and ACT biosynthesis, since they both require a common precursor, acetyl-CoA. Indeed, the partial inhibition of fatty acid degradation upon disruption of the fadD1 gene was shown to correlate with the reduction of ACT and RED production (59, 61), and conversely, the partial inhibition of fatty acid synthesis by chemical inhibitors was recently shown to correlate with enhanced ACT biosynthesis in S. coelicolor (62). Furthermore, Banchio and Gramajo (63) mentioned that expression of some enzymes of the beta-oxidation of fatty acid was high and constitutive in S. coelicolor M145, suggesting that a high rate of degradation of storage fatty acids might provide acyl-CoA precursors for polyketide antibiotic biosynthesis in this strong producer. Our studies clearly confirmed this prospective link between TAG degradation and ACT production, since we established that the TAG contents of the two antibiotic-producing strains (the ppk mutant of S. lividans TK24 and S. coelicolor M145) were clearly lower than that of the non-antibiotic-producing strain, wt S. lividans TK24.

The disruption of the ppk gene has an obvious triggering effect on TAG degradation that leads to ACT overproduction. In an attempt to rationalize these observations, we propose that in a medium limited in Pi and at late time points, the ppk mutant experiences severe energetic stress due to the absence of the important polyphosphate-dependent ATP-regenerating route catalyzed by Ppk (Esnault et al., unpublished data). This endemic ATP deficit would trigger, by still-unknown mechanisms, activation of TAG degradation as a means to reestablish the energetic balance.

The degradation of TAG produces fatty acids and glycerol. The fatty acid moiety is degraded via beta-oxidation, yielding acetyl-CoA, a major precursor of ACT biosynthesis, as well as reduced cofactors (reduced flavin adenine dinucleotide [FADH2] and NADH) whose reoxidation, via the respiratory chain, generates ATP. We propose that this important ATP generation requires increased expression of genes of the Pho regulon that are involved in phosphate supply for ATP synthesis. Indeed, the expression of the PhoR/PhoP TCS, and thus of genes of the Pho regulon under its positive control, was shown to be strongly upregulated in the ppk mutant (29).

The glycerol moiety originating from TAG degradation can either be phosphorylated by a glycerol kinase (SCO1660) and then oxidized by a glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (SCO1661) into dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) (64) or be oxidized by a glycerol dehydrogenase into dihydroxyacetone (DHA) and then phosphorylated by a dihydroxyacetone kinase (DHAK) (SCO7073) to give DHAP (65, 66). Both pathways are likely to be upregulated in the ppk mutant, leading to the formation of DHAP that is metabolized via the lower part of glycolysis. Indeed, some enzymes of the lower part of glycolysis are more abundant than enzymes of the upper part of glycolysis, which are important for hexose catabolism, in the ppk mutant. Furthermore, the smaller amount of SCO1565, an enzyme hydrolyzing major glycerophospholipids of biological membranes, in the ppk mutant strain could be related to the release of glycerol (and/or glycerol-3-P) from TAG degradation, since the expression of this gene was previously shown to be severely repressed by glycerol and Pi or glycerol-3-P (67).

In the ppk mutant, the massive generation of acetyl-CoA resulting from TAG degradation is consistent with the observed lower levels of the PDH complex (Fig. 2) and of the acetate kinase (SCO5424) (which catalyzes the phosphorylation of acetate into acetyl phosphate, a direct precursor of acetyl-CoA) seen at 96 h and 60 h (data not shown), respectively. Indeed, it is well known that the product of an enzymatic reaction represses the biosynthesis of the corresponding enzyme and/or its activity, whereas the substrate of the reaction has opposite effects. In any case, we propose that the observed downregulation of enzymes belonging to the PDH complex, combined with the upregulation of enzymes of the lower part of glycolysis (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and enolase), generates a bottleneck diverting the carbon flux toward lateral routes involved in the generation of precursors (Gly, Ser, and Trp) for the biosynthesis of the peptide antibiotics, CDA and RED, known to be overproduced by the ppk mutant (13) (Fig. 2). Furthermore, the routing of acetyl-CoA (generated by TAG degradation) toward ACT biosynthesis rather than toward the Krebs cycle in the ppk mutant could be facilitated by a reduction of Krebs cycle activity. This reduction would be linked to reduced iron acquisition accompanying the apparent higher level of endogenous oxidative stress of the ppk mutant. Indeed, some key enzymes of the Krebs cycle (such as aconitase) contain iron sulfur clusters and are exquisitely sensitive to oxidative stress (68). We suggest, therefore, that in the ppk mutant strain (as well as S. coelicolor M145), the very active degradation of fatty acids that is known to generate an abundance of reduced cofactors might contribute, in addition to ACT production, to high endogenous oxidative stress. Indeed, if the amount of reduced cofactors generated in the ppk mutant strain exceeds the reoxidizing capacity of the respiratory chain, electron leakage toward secondary acceptors might occur, generating reactive free radicals responsible for oxidative stress (69).

In conclusion, we wish to stress that the present work contributes significantly to the emergence of a novel systemic understanding of the link between primary and secondary metabolism in Streptomyces and of the trigger of antibiotic biosynthesis. Primary and secondary metabolism are intimately linked via TAG metabolism. An energetic deficit (linked to Pi limitation) would lead to the triggering of TAG degradation, yielding precursors for antibiotic biosynthesis. Proteomic analysis of the ppk mutant indicated that an active TAG degradation is indeed taking place in this strain, and some literature reports suggest that a similar process might occur in S. coelicolor (63). Furthermore, our model also provides a rational explanation for the often observed but never explained concomitant biosynthesis of peptide (from glycerol catabolism) and polyketide (from fatty acid degradation) antibiotics. It can also explain why the amount of ACT (a polyketide antibiotic) produced is usually much higher (at least 10-fold) than that of RED (a hybrid peptide-polyketide antibiotic). Indeed, three iso-C16 fatty acids substitute the hydroxyls of the glycerol backbone in the TAG of S. lividans TK24 (unpublished data). As a consequence, the ratio of glycerol to acetyl-CoA is approximately 1 to 24 in a molecule of TAG, so precursors for the polyketide antibiotic derived from the fatty acids are far more abundant than those derived from glycerol for peptide antibiotic biosynthesis. In the light of this novel representation, it would be most interesting to reconsider the abundant literature in the field as well as to conceive novel strategies to discover novel antibiotics that are most needed to face the worrying development of pathogenic bacteria resistant to most known antibiotics (70).