1. Introduction
ARTICLE SECTIONSJump To
Cancer is still one of the foremost reasons for global mortality. (1) With an anticipated 2.3 million new cases (12.5% of all cancers), female breast cancer has transcended lung cancer as the most commonly diagnosed malignancy. (1) Breast cancer (BC) is the most prevalent malignancies among women, accounting for more than one out of every ten newly diagnosed cancer cases yearly. (2) Radiation, chemotherapeutics, and surgical interventions are considered to be the mainstay of treatment for most BC patients. Despite considerable advancements in early detection methods, surgical methodologies, and novel therapeutic modalities such as molecular targeting and immunotherapeutic approaches, the incidence of BC is still alarmingly rising. Therefore, nanoformulation of chemotherapeutics could improve their physicochemical properties and reduce their systematic side effects. (3) Additionally, investigating the molecular mechanisms involved in BC’s malignant transformation and metastasis would shed light on key molecules that could be targeted for its prevention. (4−7)
Platinum-based chemotherapies are still the standard first-line chemotherapy regimen for many solid tumors, including BC. (8−11) Nedaplatin is a cisplatin analogue that has been approved in Japan for cancer treatment. (12,13) Compared to cisplatin, nedaplatin exerts less toxic side effects, namely, nephrotoxicity and gastrointestinal toxicity, and overcomes cisplatin resistance. The nedaplatin-based chemotherapeutic regimen was well tolerated and effectively enhanced the quality of life of BC patients. (14,15) However, nedaplatin (ND) resistance and its substantial toxic reactions considerably hamper its worldwide acceptance. (16) Attempts to overcome the drawbacks of nedaplatin and other platinum-based chemotherapeutics include nanoformulation into different nanocarriers to enhance their selective internalization into cancer cells while simultaneously reducing their off-target side effects and their elimination from systemic circulation. (17) In this regard, the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect, caused by the permeable vascular system and inadequate lymphatic drainage within tumors, is leveraged to drive nanoparticles to target tumor cells successfully. (18)
Many nanosystems, including polymeric nanoparticles, have been developed for the controlled release of various natural and synthetic drugs. (19) Chitosan, a natural polysaccharide, has been extensively investigated for the delivery of different drugs. Chitosan has major advantages, including biodegradability and biocompatibility. (20−22) In addition to their use as drug delivery vehicles for various synthetic and natural chemicals, chitosan nanoparticles (CS NPs) have antioxidant, anticancer, and antibacterial effects. (23) Recently, chitosan was used as an adjuvant vaccine with the potential to modulate the tumor microenvironment (TME) in several malignant contexts. (24) Encapsulation of drugs into CS NPs improves their biodistribution and reduces their side effects. (25) PEG-modified CS NPs are considered promising nanosystems for potent anticancer delivery mainly because PEG decreases NP recognition by the reticuloendothelial system (RES), thereby extending their circulation period. (26)
Betaine (BT), also known as trimethyl glycine, is a stable, natural, and nontoxic methyl donor that supports DNA methylation (at doses up to 15 g per day). (27) Shrimps, wheat germ, and sugar beets are examples of reliable sources of BT. (28) BT can act as an antitumor agent by inhibiting angiogenesis by forming complex coacervates. (29)
Despite the tremendous efforts made by researchers and clinicians to provide personalized, tailored therapeutic options for different molecular subtypes of BC patients, therapeutic outcomes are still inadequate. Chitosan, a functional biopolymer, has been used in multiple formulas to deliver chemotherapeutics owing to its anticancer activities, immunomodulatory properties, biocompatibility, and biodegradability. The ionotropic gelation method was used to generate PEG-uncoated and PEG-coated CS NPs (CS) loaded with BT, ND, or a combination of BT and ND. The prepared nanoparticles’ average size and shape, surface charge, and entrapment efficiency were studied. In addition, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was used to verify the chemical structure of the designed nanoparticles. Furthermore, the release profiles of BT, ND, and BT-ND from poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)-uncoated and PEG-coated Cs NPs were assessed at acidic and physiological pH. The cytotoxicity of the fabricated nanoparticles against MCF-7 cells was evaluated and compared to free BT and ND. The possibility of BT augmenting nedaplatin when both compounds are coloaded in PEG-uncoated/PEG-coated CS NPs was studied. The anticancer effects of the nanoformulations were also examined in the BC-bearing rat model.
2. Materials and Methods
ARTICLE SECTIONSJump To
2.1. Animals
All animal experiments were performed using 60 female Wistar rats at the animal house of the National Research Center (Cairo, Egypt). All animal experiments were carried out following the rules and regulations of the EU Directive 2010/63/EU for animal experiments. The experimental work received approval (REC-EPSPI-9/59) from the Research Ethics Committee at the Faculty of Pharmacy, Future University in Egypt. Food and water were adjusted and offered to rats by the staff members. Rats were left for 7 days to become accustomed to environmental changes before the beginning of the experiments. Polypropylene cages were utilized as shelters for the animals. Each cage accommodated two rats. Random segregation of rats into the control or various treated groups was performed. Animals were kept at 22 ± 2 °C and exposed to 12 h cycles of light and darkness.
2.2. Materials
Nedaplatin, betaine, PEG 400, and DMBA (7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene) were acquired from Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO. Low-molecular-weight chitosan was obtained from Biosynth, Carbosynth (Berkshire, UK). Sodium tripolyphosphate (TPP) was obtained from Advent (Mumbai, India). Both Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 4.5 g/L glucose and Trypan Blue were provided by Lonza Bioscience (Walkersville, MD). Trypsin, phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4), DMEM, and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) were purchased from Serva (Heidelberg, Germany). Ethanol and 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA). Fetal bovine serum (FBS) was obtained from Gibco (Waltham, MA). MCF-7 cells were purchased from ATCC (Manassas, VA).
2.3. Methods
2.3.1. Synthesis of the CS NPs
CS NPs loaded with BT, ND, and BT-ND were prepared using the ionotropic gelation method, as described elsewhere, with few alterations. (30,31) In brief, 1 mg mL–1 chitosan solution was prepared using 2% (v/v) glacial acetic acid. The pH of the solution was kept at 4 through the utilization of 10 M NaOH. The aqueous solution was filtered (0.45 μm syringe filters) and magnetically stirred (24 h). Then, 200 μL of TPP (1 mg mL–1), as a cross-linker, was blended with BT, ND, or BT-ND and added dropwise to CS solution (5 mL) while stirring. This resulted in BT/CS NPs, ND/CS NPs, and BT-ND/CS NPs.
PEG-coated CS NPs loaded with BT, ND, and BT-ND were produced by the dropwise addition of 250 μL of PEG 400 to a chitosan solution (5 mL) and stirring for 30 min. The cross-linker TPP (1 mg mL–1) was then combined with BT, ND, or BT-ND, which were then added to PEG CS solution. This resulted in the formation of BT/PEG-CS NPs, ND/PEG-CS NPs, and BT-ND/PEG-CS NPs.
2.3.2. Characterization of the Designed CS NPs
The average size, PDI, and surface charge of different nanoformulations were studied using a zeta sizer Nano ZS (Malvern Instruments, Herrenberg, Germany), at 25 °C. Transmission electron microscopy (JEOL-JEM 2100, Musashino, Tokyo, Japan) was used to study the morphology of the synthesized NPs.
The chemical features of the NPs were studied by using FTIR spectroscopy (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan).
2.3.3. Entrapment Efficiency (EE %)
The EE % of BT/CS NPs, ND/CS NPs, BT-ND/CS NPs, BT/PEG-CS NPs, ND/PEG-CS NPs, and BT-ND/PEG-CS NPs was determined as previously detailed with minor changes. (32) In brief, each sample (2 mL) was centrifuged (15,000 rpm) for 2 h at 4 °C (Hermle Z326 K, Labortechnik GmbH, Wehingen, Germany). Free BT, ND, and BT-ND in the formulation supernatant were then quantified using HPLC (Supporting Information). Equation 1 was used to determine the EE % of the prepared nanoformulations. (33)

The DLC % was determined using eq 2.

2.3.4. Release Study
In order to study the release rates of BT and ND from different CS NP formulas, the dialysis bag approach was investigated at physiological and cancerous cell pH (7.4 and 5.5, respectively). Concisely, each formula (0.5 mL) was dialyzed in 25 mL of PBS (of two different pH values) and then incubated in a shaking incubator, rotating at 150 rpm at 37 °C. At certain time points, a specific amount of each sample was drawn and instantly substituted with fresh PBS (1 mL).
2.3.5. Cytotoxicity
MCF-7 cells were cultured in 96-well plates under the standard conditions. Basically, cells were maintained in culture plates containing DMEM, 5% penicillin–streptomycin, and FBS (10%). The culture plates were situated in a 5% CO2 incubator with the temperature adjusted to 37 °C. A hemocytometer was used to count viable cells after being stained with Trypan blue. About 10,000 MCF-7 cells were added in each well for 24 h before being treated for another 48 h with increasing doses of free or nanoformulated drugs. The supernatant was decanted upon cessation of treatment, and 20 μL of MTT solution (5 mg/mL) was mixed with 80 μL of medium for 3 h. The supernatant was decanted and substituted with 100 μL of DMSO. The plates were read at 570 nm. The vitality of MCF-7 cells was detected using the formula
𝐴(sample)/𝐴(control)×100
MCF-7 cells grown in a serum-free medium treated with vehicle (CS or PEG CS NPs) served as the control.
2.3.6. BC Rat Model
2.3.6.1. Experimental Protocol
Female Wistar rats (55–60 days; 180–200 g) were classified into 10 groups of 6 animals each, as shown in Table 1.

After dosing, the rats were anesthetized with diethyl ether and sacrificed in the diestrus phase of the estrous cycle. Blood was collected, and the serum was separated for assays of molecular biomarkers.
2.3.6.2. Tumor Size Reduction (%)
Mammary gland tumors were induced in female Wistar rats (55 days, 180–200 g) by intravenous injection of a freshly prepared single dose of 20 mg/mL DMBA diluted in corn oil. By the 13th week, tumors appeared in all rats. Guided by the former study of Matsumoto et al. (36) and the calculated IC50s in this study, all investigated agents (ND, BT, ND/CS NPs, BT/CS NPs, BT-ND/CS NPs, ND/PEG-CS NPs, BT/PEG-CS NPs, and ND-BT/PEG-CS NPs) were delivered to the rats at a volume of 0.1 mL/10 g body weight. At the end of the treatment period, rats in all groups were sacrificed using thiopental (IP 200 mg/kg). Tumor volume and body weight were recorded after the induction at 3 weeks of treatment and after 6 weeks of treatment. (37) The tumor size reduction % was computed using eq 3.
2.3.7. Statistical Analysis
Ordinary one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used, followed by the Tukey HSD multiple comparisons test to compare different groups. P values < 0.05 were considered significant. All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS Statistics v. Twenty for Windows (SPSS, Chicago, IL). The graphs were plotted using GraphPad Prism 7. All results were reported as the mean of three measurements ± SD.
3. Results and Discussion
ARTICLE SECTIONSJump To
3.1. Characterization of PEGylated and Non-PEGylated CS NPs
Dynamic light scattering was involved in studying the average sizes and PDI of PEG-uncoated and PEG-coated chitosan NPs, and the results are summarized in Tables 3 and 4. All prepared nanoparticles had diameters between 140 and 295 nm, which were previously described for various nanoparticles encompassing antitumor agents. This size range allows NPs and their payload of drugs to accumulate passively in cancer cells with loose vascularity and deprived lymphatic drainage. (38,39) As shown in Table 2, the surface charges of the synthesized nanoparticles were highly cationic (+27.60 ± 1.48, +31.91 ± 9.27, +41.4 ± 2.36, and +38.975 ± 2.28 mV for CS NPs, BT/CS NPs, ND/CS NPs, and BT-ND/CS NPs, respectively) and originated from chitosan. These high surface charges would impart high stability to the designed NPs. The DLC % of BT and ND in BT/CS NPs and ND/CS NPs were 8.14 and 9.44%, respectively. While the DLC % of BT and ND in BT-ND/CS NPs were 6.91 and 7.84%, respectively. In addition, Table 2 shows the synthesized CS nanoparticles’ entrapment efficiencies, demonstrating CS NPs to carry high percentages of either BT, ND, or BT and ND.

Modifying the surface of CS NPs via PEGylation was reported to improve their physicochemical and biological properties. (40,41)
The PDI and size were reduced by coating CS NPs with PEG (Table 3). This is because, during the cross-linking process, PEG forms an interpenetrating structural network with chitosan, enhancing the compactness and uniformity of the NPs’ surface, thus decreasing their diameter and surface charges following PEGylation. (42) Additionally, the surface charge of PEG-coated CS NPs has decreased, as compared to the uncoated CS NPs, owing to shielding the chitosan cationic amine groups by the anionic PEG chains. (42) The DLC % of BT and ND in BT/PEG-CS NPs and ND/PEG-CS NPs were 10.32 and 11.17, respectively. While DLC % of BT and ND in BT-ND/PEG-CS NPs were 9.21 and 10.54%. Our findings showed that PEGylation of chitosan NPs (loaded with BT, ND, or BT-ND) has improved the DLC % and EE % of either BT or ND owing to the colloidal stabilization impact of PEG chains on the CS NP exteriors. (31) ND/CS NPs and BT-ND/CS NPs were successfully formed with spherical shapes and smooth surfaces. TEM analysis also revealed that modifying the CS NPs surface with PEG had no impact on their globular morphologies (Figure 1).

3.2. Fourier-Transform Infrared Spectroscopy
The FTIR spectrum of BT exhibited four major peaks at 3376.9 cm–1 (−OH stretching), 1635.4 cm–1 (C═O stretching), 1392.4 cm–1 (–CH bending), and 1128.9 cm–1 (C–O–C) (Figure 2a). (43) In addition, the spectrum of ND revealed four distinct peaks at 3218.7 cm–1 (−OH stretching), 1619.9 cm–1 (C═C), 1367.3, and 1060.7 cm–1 (C═C) (Figure 2b). (44,45)

Figure 2. FTIR spectra of (a) free BT, (b) free nedaplatin, (c) PEG-uncoated CS NPs, (d) BT/CS NPs, (e) ND/CS NPs, (f) BT-ND/CS NPs, (g) PEG-CS NPs, (h) BT/PEG-CS NPs, (i) ND/PEG-CS NPs, and (j) BT-ND/PEG-CS NPs.

The stretching vibrations of amine (−NH2) and/or hydroxyl (−OH) and (C═C bond) and carboxylic (C═O bond) groups may correspond to distinct peaks in the FTIR spectra of CS NPs at 3420 and 1620 cm–1, respectively. A peak at 1126 cm–1 was also identified, equivalent to an alcoholic (C–O) stretching vibration (46) (Figure 2c). The FTIR spectra of BT/CS NPs, ND/CS NPs, and BT-ND/CS NPs (Figure 2d–f), on the other hand, displayed all main peaks of BT, ND, and CS NPs with no notable shifts, indicating physical incorporation of BT and ND within the CS matrix. (47) Furthermore, a single peak was identified at 2919.8 cm–1, which could be ascribed to the (−CH2) stretching vibration. This shows that the CS NPs were successfully coated with PEG (Figure 2g). All major BT, ND, and PEGylated CS NPs peaks were verified in the spectra of BT/PEG-CS NPs, ND/PEG-CS NPs, and BT-ND/PEG-CS NPs (Figure 2h–j), indicating the physical entrapment of ND and BT within the CS matrix. These findings are consistent with previous reports that described the synthesis of PEGylated nanocarriers. (48)
3.3. Release Study
The release of BT and ND from the CS NPs was investigated at pH 7.4 and pH 5.5 (tumor cells’ microenvironment). The released BT and ND were quantified using HPLC (Supporting Information). The CS and PEG-coated CS NPs were stable at pH 7.4. Regarding CS NPs (Figure 3), around 28.9 and 29.7% of the entrapped BT and ND were eluted after 72 h from BT/CS NPs and ND/CS NPs, respectively. In addition, 32.9 and 33.8% of the entrapped BT and ND were discharged from BT-ND/CS NPs, at 37 °C, after 72 h. Concerning the PEG-coated CS NPs (Figure 4), 33.8 and 31.1% of the entrapped BT and ND were eluted after 72 h from BT/PEG-CS NPs and ND/PEG-CS NPs, respectively. At the same time, 30.5 and 31.2% of the entrapped BT and ND, respectively, were released from BT-ND/PEG-CS NPs, at 37 °C, after 72 h.

Figure 4. Release percentages of (a) BT from BT/PEG-CS NPs, (b) ND from ND/PEG-CS NPs, (c) BT from BT-ND/PEG-CS NPs, and (d) ND from BT-ND/PEG-CS NPs at 37 °C at two different pH values.

On the other hand, both CS NPs and PEG-CS NPs displayed faster drug release percentages at acidic pH 5.5 in comparison to release at physiological pH. Regarding CS NPs, 71 and 73% of the entrapped BT and ND were effluxed after 72 h from BT/CS NPs and BT/CS NPs, respectively, at pH 5.5. At the same time, 75 and 76% of the entrapped BT and ND, respectively, were effluxed from BT-ND/CS NPs after 72 h. Regarding PEG-coated CS NPs, 88.3 and 89.7% of the entrapped BT and ND were released after 72 h from BT/PEG-CS NPs and ND/PEG-CS NPs, respectively. At the same time, 92.5 and 94.6% of the entrapped BT and ND, respectively, were released after 72 h from BT-ND/PEG-CS NPs. These findings revealed that the PEG layer around the CS NPs has increased the release of drugs at pH 5.5. In the acidic microenvironment, the chitosan amino groups are protonated, enhancing the disassembling of the cross-linked chitosan chains and allowing the penetration of the CS NPs by the release medium. Consequently, this leads to the faster release of BT and ND from the nanoparticles. (30) The increased release of BT and ND in the acidic tumor microenvironment would ultimately enhance the selective targeting of the entrapped drugs to BC cells.
Moreover, the drugs were released from the polymeric matrix by desorption, erosion, degradation, and diffusion mechanisms. (49) The burst release observed in our study might be attributed to the amount of payload scattered on the polymer’s surface. (50) After 72 h, approximately 70–89% of the loaded drugs were released from uncoated and coated CS NPs. These results align very well with previous studies conducted by Meng et al., (51) Ulu et al., (52) and Zhang et al., (53) who reported the release of 50–70, 80–90, and 80% of the loaded drugs from CS NPs within 48–72 h, respectively. Thus, our findings agree very well with those of the previous reports. In addition, grafting with hydrophilic, biodegradable, and biocompatible PEG polymers improves the solubility in water. (54) PEG serves as a cross-linker that facilitates drug release via increasing hydrophilicity and through its swelling capability, which eventually increases the drug release. (55)
3.4. Cytotoxicity
MTT assay was conducted on MCF-7 cells treated with ten increasing concentrations (ranging from 0.01 to 300 μg/mL) of free BT, free nedaplatin, BT/CS NPs, ND/CS NPs, BT-ND/CS NPs, PEG-CS NPs, BT/PEG-CS NPs, ND/PEG-CS NPs, and BT-ND/PEG-CS NPs, in addition to blank CS NPs and PEG-coated CS NPs, for 48 h. The percentage of viable cells was drawn against the different concentrations of both non-PEGylated and PEGylated CS nanoparticles (Figure 5), and IC50 values were calculated (Table 4) and used for further investigations. Former studies have shed light on the importance of encapsulating platinum-based anticancer agents to minimize systemic toxicity, enhance the retention of the administered drugs at the tumor site, and avoid their degradation. (56) In this study, the synthesized CS nanoparticles (BT/CS NPs and ND/CS NPs) showed a remarkable increase in the cytotoxic activity against MCF-7 compared to their corresponding free drugs, BT and ND. These results support a previously published report where the encapsulation of ND into cucurbiturils host molecules improved the antitumor activity against MCF-7 more than the free drug. (57) Moreover, in the current study, the PEGylated CS nanoparticles even displayed a cytotoxic activity against MCF-7 higher than that of the non-PEGylated CS nanoparticles. Likewise, a former study suggested that oxaliplatin encapsulated in PEG-CS NPs displayed a lower IC50 (17.98 ± 3.99 μg/mL), i.e., higher antitumor activity against MCF-7 cells than the oxaliplatin encapsulated in non-PEGylated CS NPs with an IC50 of (23.88 ± 6.29 μg/mL). (30)

Figure 5. Cell viability of MCF-7 cells after treatment with both (A) non-PEGylated and (B) PEGylated chitosan particles for 48 h. The values are presented as the mean ± the standard deviation (SD) of three independent trials.

The current study included two nanoformulations for the combined BT and ND drug therapy, which, as speculated, showed the lowest IC50s and were found to be the most potent formulations. The BT-ND/PEG-CS NPs displayed the lowest IC50 (2.77 ± 0.7 μg/mL) among all of the investigated samples. This could be attributed to the synergistic effect of both BT and ND drugs and improved drug properties when they are encapsulated in PEGylated CS NPs.
3.5. In Vivo Studies in BC-Bearing Rat Model
3.5.1. Effect on Tumor Volume
Tumor volume increased with time in the DMBA-treated group and in all treated groups with different treatment regimens.
As shown in Figure 6, there was a significant reduction in the tumor size % (p < 0.001) in the groups that received ND, BT, BT/CS NPs, ND/CS NPs, BT-ND/CS NPs, BT/PEG-CS NPs, ND/PEG-CS NPs, and BT-ND/PEG-CS NPs treatments compared to the group that received no treatment (induced with DMBA only). The current in vivo findings support the in vitro cytotoxicity results on the MCF-7 cell line, whereby the fabricated nanoparticles demonstrated a higher ability to decrease the tumor size than the free drugs. Furthermore, the PEGylated nanoparticles reduced the tumor size more than the non-PEGylated nanoparticles. PEG has been shown to lengthen the circulation time of NPs by masking the NPs from recognition by the mononuclear phagocytic system, hence protecting them from destruction and elimination. As such, the time that PEGylated nanoparticles remain intact in circulation is more than that of the non-PEGylated nanoparticles. (58) Moreover, the PEGylated CS NPs possess positively charged surfaces that were noticed to facilitate the internalization of chemotherapeutic drugs by cancer cells as described by Lu and colleagues, who reported a remarkable increase in Paclitaxel (PTX) chitosan-modified PLGA nanoparticle internalization by MDA-MB-231 cells as compared to the free PTX. (59) It is worth mentioning that PTX-encapsulated PLGA nanoparticles’ cellular uptake and cytotoxicity in different cancer cell lines were significantly improved by the PEG and chitosan coating. (60) Therefore, the considerable reduction in the tumor size observed in this study upon exposure to PEGylated NPs could be due to the immune evasion of the PEGylated nanoparticles, their positive surface charges, and improved cellular uptake.

Figure 6. Tumor size reduction % in rats that received treatment with (A) ND, (B) BT, (C) ND/CS NPs, (D) BT/CS NPs, (E) BT-ND/CS NPs, (F) ND/PEG-CS NPs, (G) BT/PEG-CS NPs, and (H) ND-BT/PEG-CS NPs as compared to the DMBA-only group. The results are displayed as the mean of triplicate experiments ± the standard deviation (SD). The symbols (●), (#), and (*) refer to statistical significance from DMBA-only group, BT-treated cells, and ND-treated cells, respectively. The symbols (⧫) and ($) refer to statistical significance from BT/CS NPs and ND/CS NPs, respectively. P-value ≤ 0.05 is considered statistically significant.

The PEGylated nanoparticles containing the combination of ND and BT (BT-ND/PEG-CS NPs) showed the highest effect, causing an ∼90% reduction in the tumor size. These findings provide evidence that the antitumor activities of ND and BT are enhanced upon encapsulation in CS NPs and that PEG-coating of these NPs increases their activity. Furthermore, the coloading of BT with ND in CS NPs or CS-PEG NPs results in synergistic and chemosensitizing anticancer effects. To the best of our knowledge, the cytotoxic effect induced by ND and amplified by BT and CS NPs on BC has not been reported. Thus, in the presented study, we explored the proposition that combining ND and BT can augment the cytotoxic activity of ND on BC (in vitro and in vivo) and, hence, might prolong the survival duration in BC patients. Our findings suggested a novel potential role for the CS NPs, CS-PEG NPs, and even a surplus activity for the combined BT-ND/PEG NPs in reducing the BC tumor size. Therefore, the fabricated NPs were capable of causing remarkable repression of BC and possibly reducing chemoresistance to drug therapy.
4. Conclusions
ARTICLE SECTIONSJump To
Ionic gelation was used to develop PEG-uncoated and PEG-coated chitosan NPs that incorporated BT and/or ND. The PEG-modified CS NPs had smaller particle sizes, PDI, and zeta potential but more EE %. All synthesized NPs could release their payload in the acidic cancer microenvironment (pH 5.5) while remaining stable at physiological pH. BT-ND/PEG-CS NPs exerted the highest cytotoxicity against MCF-7 cells and had the most significant repression of tumor size in BC-bearing rats. These data suggest that BT-ND/PEG-CS NPs could further be investigated as a promising therapeutic strategy for treating BC.