1. INTRODUCTION peripheral systems through interaction [7]. In addition, NTSR4 was previously identified in bullfrogs [8], but has yet
Neurotensin (NTS/NT) is a type of neuropeptide that is to be identified in vertebrates.  
found throughout the body, including the central nervous system, the gastrointestinal tract, the cardiovascular system, Both NTSR1 and NTSR2 belong to G-protein-coupled and other areas. It has been demonstrated that it participates receptors with seven transmembrane structural domains [2­in numerous physiological and pathological processes in the 4]. However, NTSR3, which belongs to the sortilin family, is body. About 30 years ago, the discovery of levocabastine-a plasma membrane glycoprotein with only a single sensitive neurotensin binding sites suggested the existence of transmembrane domain [7]. NTS exerts various a neurotensin receptor (NTSR) subtype [1]. In 1990, physiological and pathological effects mainly through the Nakanishi successfully identified the NTS high-affinity mediation of its receptors. SR48,692 antagonizes NTSR1 receptor -NTSR1 (Kd = 0.16 ± 0.04 nM) [2]. More than one preferentially [9], while the antagonist SR-142,948A subtype of NTSR has also been found in rat hypothalamic antagonizes NTSR2 simultaneously [5]. It suggests that cDNA. Subsequently, NTSR2 with NTS low-affinity was NTSR2 may be involved in different mediating effects from successfully cloned from cDNA of both rat (Kd = 3.7 ± 0.2 other NTSRs, such as analgesia and hypothermia. The nM) and mouse (Kd = 2.45 ± 1.04 nM) in COS cells in 1996 differential distribution [5, 10] and developmental patterns [3, 4]. It has been reported that NTSR2 shares 64% [11] between NTSR1 and NTSR2 also suggest the two homology (416 amino acids) with NTSR1 in rats and 39% receptors are involved differently in brain function and homology (417 amino acids) with NTSR1 in mice. Later, development. human NTSR2 (410 amino acids) was also cloned 
NTSR2 has a molecular weight of 45k Da, and its gene issuccessfully [5] and found to be stably expressed in Chinese located on human chromosome 2p25.1 and mousehamster ovary (CHO) cells [6]. Up to now, three subtypes of chromosome 12 [12, 13]. vNTSR2 (281 amino acids) is aNTR have been identified (NTSR1, NTSR2, and NTSR3), functional receptor produced by variable splicing of NTSR2.
which mediate the action of NTS in the central and vNTSR2 and NTSR2 are co-expressed throughout the brain 
and spinal cord and can form multiple ligands (homodimers *Address correspondence to these authors at the Department of and heterodimers) [14]. Co-expression of NTSR2 with Neurosurgery, General Hospital of the Western Theater Command, 270# NTSR1 may lead to heterodimerization thereby affecting theRongdu Avenue, Jinniu District, Chengdu, Sichuan Province, 610083, distribution and function of NTSR1 receptor [15] but doesChina; E-mail: Tianfu_47@163.com (Y.M.); oyq911@126.com (Q.O.Y) 
not affect the activity of extracellular signal-regulated 

kinases (ERK1/2) mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling or NTS-induced internalization of NTSR1 [16]. In regions where both NTSR1 and NTSR2 are expressed, we should be aware of whether this heterodimerization affects our observations on the true monomer. Sarret found that NTSR2 was also expressed in some regions lacking NTS, suggesting that NTS might not be its only endogenous ligand for the first time [17]. In 2003, beta-lactotensin (a bioactive peptide derived from β-lactoglobulin) was discovered as the first natural ligand of NTSR2 [18]. NTSR2 is involved in many pathways of action, such as anti-injury action [19], anti-anxiety action [20], acute stress and fear memory [21], hypertensive activity [18], and cholesterol-lowering action [22]. 
At present, several studies have demonstrated the key roles of NTSR1 and NTSR3 in the physiological and pathological processes of the body, while the role of NTSR2 has not been systematically confirmed. Therefore, this paper reviews the expression of NTSR2 in different organs or systems and its role in various diseases. 

2.NTSR2 AND PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS 
For years, researchers regarded the dopamine and glutamate hypotheses as the main clues to the treatment of psychiatric disorders. Previous reports suggest that NTS has antipsychotic effects in a variety of dopamine-related disorders. NTSRs targeting agonists are promising for the treatment of schizophrenia symptoms with fewer adverse side effects. Chromosomes 2 and 12, where NTSR2 is located, were shown to affect hypothalamic NTS by quantitative trait loci (QTL) mapping [23]. Chromosome 2 is associated with some impulse and behavioral deficiencies, such as alcohol addiction, conduct disorders, and suicide attempts [24]. Many researchers have explored the powerful therapeutic potential of NTSR2 in psychiatric disorders, starting with genetics. 
2.1. NTSR2 and Schizophrenias 
Many reports confirm the involvement of the NTS/NTSR system in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia by affecting the dopamine system. Both NTSR1 and NTSR2 are involved in regulating the basal release of D-serine and glutamate [25], the expression of D1-dopamine receptors (D1R), and the prefrontal cortex (PFC) glutamate [26]. However, the relationship between the dysregulation of dopamine transmission and the lack of glutamate transmission remains to be discussed. The current application of atypical antipsychotics has focused on reducing the activity of D2R [27]. It seems that we can try to discuss whether there are some new possibilities for D1R. Selective activation of the MAPK-ERK1/2 pathway by NTS is an important process of amphetamine-induced sensitization, and NTSR2 initiates this process before N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptor activation [28]. In the striatum after amphetamine-induced sensitization, some investigators have also observed the involvement of NTSR2 in regulating the release of γ­aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glutamate [25]. This suggests that NTSR2 is a key component in both initiation and regulation of the outcome of amphetamine sensitization. 
At the same time, NTSR2 mediates magnocellular neurosecretory cell (MNC) membrane voltage to regulate the degree of aggregation and discharge induced by glutamic acid afferents [29]. This sudden electrical activity may affect neuronal circuits and play an important role in the work of the brain. In this study, MNCs expressed NTSR2 preferentially. Does this imply that NTSR2 plays a more critical role than NTSR1 in this process?  
NTSR2 is involved in mediating the regulatory effects of NTS on pre-pulse inhibition suppression (PPI), acoustic startle response (ASR), and motor activity [30, 31]. However, it is noteworthy that NTSR1 plays a major role in this process and that NTSR2 does not regulate the normal function of sensorimotor gating mechanisms. These results provide a basis for the use of NTSR2 targeting as antipsychotics. 

2.2. NTSR2 and Fear 
In 2007, the NTS/NTSR system was shown to play an important role in the regulation of emotions (including fear memory) for the first time, by testing fear conditioning in NTSR2 gene-deficient mice [32]. Meanwhile, they found that NTSR2 was mainly expressed in astrocytes and lowly expressed in neurons. Ten years later, NTSR2 was found to be highly expressed in Thy1 neurons within the basolateral amygdala (BLA) to reduce fear [33]. Both of the above reports suggest NTSR2 activation is associated with reducing fear, but the expression characteristics in astrocytes and neurons are somewhat controversial. We hope to follow up with more reports to shed light on this issue, as well as further research on the pathway of NTSR2 regulating fear memory. 

2.3. NTSR2 and Addiction 
The key to overcoming addiction lies in the reward mechanism in the brain. By altering striatal dopamine signaling which is involved in reinforcement and reward-seeking behavior, NTSR2 is involved in regulating higher doses of ethanol-induced hypnotic resistance and alcohol consumption. However, it may resist NTS-mediated motor inhibition and ataxic effects [34]. This idea was confirmed by Pandey who identified NTSR2 mainly on the neurons of paraventricular thalamus (PVT) by fluorescence histoche­mistry. NTSR2 increases exploratory behavior in chronic over-drinkers in the PVT [35]. However, this result may be related to the ability of NTSR2 to regulate ethanol consumption. 


2.4. NTSR2 and Anxiety 
Enhanced excitability of amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART) -positive neurons in the oval region of the oval bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (ovBNST) has been reported as a key electrical activity in anxiety-like behaviors caused by chronic pain [36]. Postsynaptic activation of ovBNST neurons stimulates the release of NTS. At the same time, NTS in turn excites or inhibits synaptic transmission [37]. In contrast to the effect of NTSR1, NTSR2 activation reduces inhibitory transmission [38]. In connection with the role of NTSR2 in analgesia, we wondered boldly whether NTSR2 was also involved in CART-positive neuron excitation or other key processes, and thus participating in anti-anxiety effects, as previous studies have shown [39]. 


2.5. Others 
NTSR2 synergistically regulates synaptic transmission in ovBNST with other neuropeptides to stimulate the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA axis) [37]. Most orexin neurons express NTSR2 mRNA but not NTSR1 mRNA [40]. Both BNST neurons and orexin neurons are recognized as multifunctional neurons. So, we need more information to determine the role of NTSR2 in these processes. 


3.ROLE OF NTSR2 IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM  
The difference in the developmental pattern in the brain between NTSR1 and NTSR2 has attracted great interest. NTSR2 increases with brain maturity, suggesting different involvement of the two receptors in brain function and development [11]. 
Several studies have shown that NTSR2 is widely distributed in the adult rat brain [17, 41, 42]. In situ hybridization (ISH) was used to detect its distribution characteristics, but now people prefer to use immuno­histochemistry (IHC). Controversy over the expression characteristics of NTSR2 has focused on whether it is mainly in neurons or astrocytes. It may be caused by the difference in sensitivity between IHC and ISH techniques, the difference in experimental animal species, or the inconsistent expression characteristics of NTSR2 under physiological and pathological conditions. Meanwhile, there is a controversy about whether NTS is an agonist or an antagonist of NTSR2 [43, 44]. 
Sarret describes the distribution of NTSR2 protein in the mammalian brain for the first time [17]. Until then, NTSR2 was explored by direct or indirect visualization to analyze its localization. Sarret believes NTSR2 is distributed in neurons, mainly associated with their dendritic arbors. However, they do not deny that NTSR2 may be present in astrocytes under pathological conditions. 
Selective NTSR2 antagonists could not block the effect of NTS on the excitability of dentate gyrus granule cells (GCs) in the dentate gyrus. It was demonstrated that the increase in neuronal excitability induced by NTS was mediated by NTSR1 rather than NTSR2 [45]. However, NTSR2 activated by NTS or levocabastine can mediate the ERK1/2 cascade in rat cerebellar granulosa cells [9]. These results seem to suggest NTSR2 could be the key to unlocking the mysterious door of granulosa cells. 
In a 2021 study, NTSR2 protein was clearly demonstrated to be expressed in the rat hippocampus, and linked to astrocyte and perivascular inflammation in rat and mouse epilepsy models [46]. It is suggested that NTSR2 has great potential in the nervous system and may be a therapeutic target for neuroinflammation.  

4.THE ROLE OF NTSR2 IN ANALGESIA
NTSR2 is mainly expressed in brain structures associated with pain regulation, namely the periaqueductal gray (PAG) and the rostral ventrolateral medulla (RVLM) [47, 48a, b], suggesting an inextricable relationship between NTSR2 and pain. Subsequent studies have supported this idea. 
NTS are easily degraded by peptidases and cannot cross the blood-brain barrier. Therefore, some researchers made use of the differences between the binding sites of NTSRs to synthesize a series of NTS analogues [49] (Contulakin-G, NT69, NT79, etc.) in order to cause an effect similar to NTS in the center. NT69L preferentially selects NTSR1 for analgesia but may cause hypothermia [50]. In contrast, NT79 has a higher selectivity for NTSR2, and intravenous use of NT79 is able to induce analgesia without altering body temperature or blood pressure [51]. Contulakin-G (CGX) (A marine analgesic peptide) also preferentially and selectively agonizes NTSR2 to exert its anti-injurious effects [52]. All of the above three NTS analogues can synergize the analgesic effects of morphine and minimize the adverse effects associated with morphine use.  
Multiple studies have shown that NTSR2 is an essential component in spinal analgesia [53]. NTSR2 located in RVLMS regulates anti-injury processes mediated by the release of norepinephrine (NE) from the spine [54]. NTSR2 located in the lumbar spinal cord is involved in the de­inhibition of the downstream pain control pathway [55]. Its agonists are also effective in reversing weight-bearing and posture deficits caused by nerve damage but this idea needs more research to confirm. It has been reported that NTSR2 has a more important role than NTSR1 in thermal injury perception [56]. NTSR2 activates NMDA receptors by mediating Tyr-1472 phosphorylation on GluN2B, thereby participating in thermal nociception [57]. But we do not exclude that there are more possible ways for NTSR2 to engage in thermal damage perception. We expect more NTSR2-targeted analgesic agonists with stronger efficacy and fewer adverse effects. 

5.ROLE OF NTSR2 IN THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM 
In 2006, Schulz used a novel antibody to assay NTSR2 receptor content in human gastrointestinal tract cells, to identify the precise cellular and subcellular sites of NTS plasma membrane receptors in the human gastrointestinal tract [58]. The results showed that NTSR2 was highly abundant in gastric mucosal parietal cells, neuroendocrine cells of the small and large intestines, and exocrine pancreatic cells. This suggests that the effect of NTS on gastric acid and pancreatic exocrine is mediated by low-affinity NTSR2, but further studies on the involvement of NTSR2 in this pathway are still lacking.  


6.ROLE OF NTSR2 IN THE MUSCULAR LAYER 
Two studies in 1999 and 2010 respectively detected NTS and NTSR2 in human colonic muscle strips and ascending muscles. NTS response was almost insensitive to levocabastine, indicating the absence of NTSR2 [59, 60]. NTSR1 and NTSR2 co-locate with bladder smooth muscle cells (SMCs), suggesting that the NTS-NTSR pathway may play a mediating role in bladder smooth muscle contraction [61]. NTSR2 has been reported to be present in human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells (PASMCs) and the medial smooth muscle layer of pulmonary arteries in rats with pulmonary hypertension, but undetectable in pulmonary artery endothelial cells (PAECs) and control rats [62]. Combined with NTS/NTSR1 is associated with tumor progression [63], we speculate whether NTSR2 has the same effect in lung cancer. 


7.NTSR2 AND TUMORS 
GPCRs are actively involved in the signal transduction that controls homeostatic processes, including the balance between cell death and proliferation. NTS/NTSR1 is involved in cancer initiation, proliferation, apoptosis, metastasis, and differentiation, and its role in multiple signaling pathways has been reported. However, there are a few reports on the relationship between NTSR2 and tumors. 
7.1. NTSR2 and Glioma  
It was previously reported that NTSR2 was highly expressed in most glioblastoma samples [58]. Ayala found that NTSR2 promoted the phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2(ERK1/2) by internalizing NTS in C6 glioma cells, while NTSR2 could not internalize NTS or activate ERK1/2 in normal astrocytes. Thus, the biological function of NTSR2 is realized by internalizing NTS [64]. Regrettably, the literature does not further study the biological function of NTS/NTSR2 in glioma.  

7.2. NTSR2 and Leukemia  
Sofiane first detected the expression of NTSR2 in human B cell lines, B cells, and peripheral B cells of patients with malignant lymphocytic leukemia. It is overexpressed in malignant B cells. Significant differences in NTSR2 expression were also observed between metastatic and normal lymph nodes [65]. It has been hypothesized that NTSR2 is involved in the regulation of immune response and cellular interactions by NTS. Five years later, the team proposed that NTSR2 activation does not involve its classical ligand, NTS, but rather overexpressed NTSR2 promotes cell survival and apoptosis resistance in the presence of Tyrosine Kinase receptor B (TrkB) ligand brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), through interaction with TrkB and sustained activation of their signaling pathway [66]. Subsequently, the important influence of BDNF and its subordinate nurse-like cell on this process was further confirmed [67]. It is the first time that the role and signaling pathway of NTSR2 have been fully confirmed in a certain disease. In malignant B-lymphocytic leukemia, NTSR2 plays an important role in the process of apoptosis as an oncogene, which provides an excellent idea for us to study the role of NTSR2 in other types of tumors. 

7.3. NTSR2 and Neuroendocrine Tumors 
Previous studies have reported high levels of NTSR2 in neuroendocrine cells of human small and large intestine and exocrine pancreatic cells. Several insulinoma samples have also reported the expression of NTSR2, but no other neuroendocrine malignant tumors such as carcinoid, pituitary adenoma, or pheochromocytoma have been observed. Expression of NTSR2 was also reported in several insulinoma samples but was not observed in carcinoid, pituitary adenoma, pheochromocytoma, and other neuroendocrine malignant tumors [58]. Ji Tae analyzed the expression of neurotensin and its receptors in four human NET cell lines (BON, QGP-1, NCI-H727, and UMC-11) by RT-PCR, none of which detected NTSR2 expression. Nevertheless, However, the expression of NTSR2 was increased after treatment of BON and QGP-1 cells with the demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, suggesting that NTSR1 and NTSR2 are epigenetically regulated through methylation in NET cells [68]. However, more work is needed to clarify the detailed mechanisms. 
The G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling system mediates autocrine and paracrine loops in cancer cells, and cross-talk between insulin receptors and GPCRs has been demonstrated [69]. In fact, NTSR2 has previously been reported to mediate the involvement of NTS in pancreatic -cell anti-apoptosis by interacting with NTSR3 [70]. More and more studies have confirmed that NTS/NTSRs play a key role in the growth and development of neuroendocrine tumors [70]. NTSR2, which is also a G-protein-coupled receptor, deserves more attention. 

7.4. NTSR2 and Gastric Cancer 
NTSR2 was previously reported to be expressed in 24 cases (14%) of gastric cancer [58], but there was no correlation between expression levels and tumor type, local tumor growth, lymph node or distant metastasis, overall tumor stage, or patient survival in this report. Possibly due to this reason, subsequent reports did not study the role of NTSR2 in gastric cancer, but only analyzed the role of NTS/NTSR1 in gastric cancer tissues and obtained the result that it is an independent adverse factor affecting the prognosis of gastric cancer [71]. NTSR2 has found to be expressed in gastric mucosal parietal cells [58], so we speculate whether it co-mediates the role of NTS in the gastrointestinal tract with NTSR1. More studies are needed to confirm this question.  

7.5. NTSR2 and Colorectal Cancer 
Several previous reports indicated that NTSR2 was not found in any colorectal cancer cell line [72-74]. However, two studies in 2006 showed that NTSR2 was expressed in clinical colon cancer pathological tissue samples [58], and decreased expression could also be detected after the induced differentiation of cells by sodium butyrate. The researchers believe that this study also does not show that NTSR2 is an activator of cell proliferation [75]. This opens a new perspective on the relationship between NTSR2 and colorectal cancer, despite the small sample size of the study. The relationship between the expression of NT and its receptors in colorectal cancer and clinical outcomes was discussed in a recent prospective study [76]. Frustratingly, NTSR2 was not tested. Has the study of NTSR2 in colorectal cancer been abandoned? 


7.6. NTSR2 and Pancreatic Cancer 
More than a decade ago, NTSR2 was reported to be expressed in some clinicopathologic tissues of pancreatic ductal carcinoma [58] but was denied the presence of NTSR2 [73] in a pancreatic cancer cell line (MIA PaCa-2). 

In addition, no specific studies have reported the association between NTSR2 and pancreatic cancer. A report showed that the NTSR expressed in cases of pancreatic ductal carcinoma was NTSR1 rather than NTSR2 [77]. It seems the possibility of an association between NTSR2 and pancreatic cancer has been rejected in the above results. 


7.7. NTSR2 and Other Tumors 
NTSR2 has reported to be expressed in highly differentiated malignant prostate cancer cell lines and strongly expressed as monomers and dimers in the luminal cell layer [78, 79]. At the same time, expression was also found in small samples of ovarian cancer and breast cancer [58], but no further studies were conducted. 


CONCLUSION 
NTSR2 is rarely studied as the main subject and is mostly studied incidentally when studying NTS or NTSR1. NTSR1, NTSR3, and ligand NTS have all been identified as molecular targets for the treatment of pain, schizophrenia, addiction, or cancer. Similarly, few studies on NTSR2 have focused on analgesia and neurological disorders, followed by sporadic scattering in various systemic tumors. At present, most studies remain at the level of its expression characteristics, and only one complete signaling pathway has been confirmed (diffuse malignant B-lymphocytic leukemia). Therefore, NTSR2 also harbors great potential, just like NTS and NTSR1, in physiological or pathological conditions of the body, especially in analgesia, psychiatric disorders, nervous system, and tumors. In the future, we look forward to more research to uncover the mysteries of NTSR2. 

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
NTS/NT = Neurotensin 
NTSR = Neurotensin Receptor 
Kd = Dissociation Constant 
CHO = Chinese Hamster Ovary  
ERK1/2 = Extracellular Signal-regulated Kinases 
MAPK = Mitogen-activated Protein Kinase 
QTL = Quantitative Trait Loci  
D1R = D1-dopamine Receptor 
PFC = Prefrontal Cortex 
NMDA = N-methyl-D-aspartic Acid 
GABA = γ-aminobutyric Acid 
MNC = Magnocellular Neurosecretory Cell  
PPI = Pre-pulse Inhibition 
ASR = Acoustic Startle Response  
BLA = Basolateral Amygdala 
PVT = Paraventricular Thalamus 
CART = Amphetamine-regulated Transcript 
ovBNST = The Oval Bed Nucleus of the Stria Terminalis  HPA = Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal Axis ISH = In situ Hybridization  IHC = Immunohistochemistry GC = Dentate Gyrus Granule Cell PAG = Periaqueductal Gray RVLM = Rostral Ventrolateral Medulla CGX = Contulakin-G NE = Norepinephrine SMC = Smooth Muscle Cell PASMC = Pulmonary Artery Smooth Muscle Cell PAEC = Pulmonary Artery Endothelial Cell TrkB = Tyrosine Kinase Receptor B BNDF = Brain-derived Neurotrophic Factor GPCR = G-protein-coupled Receptor 

