Introduction
Diverting ileostomies are commonly formed for the purpose of reducing the morbidity of anastomotic leak and pelvic sepsis following bowel resection. However, a diverting loop ileostomy itself is associated with morbidity. Conversely, end ileostomies are typically performed alongside subtotal colectomy or proctocolectomy when a distal anastomosis is not created. Ileostomy patients are subject to one of the highest rates of readmission for any operative procedure.1

Ileostomies create a bypass of the colon and lead to increased losses of sodium and fluid through the stoma effluent. These changes often lead to electrolyte abnormalities and dehydration. All-cause readmission rates of 26–30% have been reported.2-5 Dehydration accounts for 37–44% of total readmissions.4, 6-9 Dehydration is a significant risk factor for kidney injury and ileostomy formation is associated with increased risk of AKI, which persists after closure.10 Reduction in estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and AKI are associated with increased risk of hospitalization and death, and even small increases in serum creatinine have been linked to poor prognosis.11

In this analysis, patients with a newly formed ileostomy were studied for readmission within 60 days of discharge. It was hypothesized that patients readmitted could be identified as high risk by their clinical characteristics and that they would demonstrate poorer renal function when the ileostomy was electively reversed.

Methods
This retrospective cohort study was performed at the Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital (RBWH), a tertiary referral centre in Queensland, Australia. All patients who underwent an ileostomy forming procedure between January 2015 and December 2020 were included. Data were collected from February 2021 to May 2022. Patients who were readmitted within 60 days of discharge following ileostomy formation (readmission group) were identified along with a comparison group of those who were not readmitted within 60 days (no readmission group). Cohorts were not matched for age, gender, body mass index (BMI) or comorbidity. Readmissions were identified as being admitted to a public health service in Queensland and identified by the state-wide hospital viewer platform that records admission details for all public hospital admissions.

Demographic and operative data were retrieved including, ileostomy type, complications, return to theatre, chemotherapy and radiotherapy treatments and readmissions within 60 days of discharge following ileostomy formation. Blood results before the index operation with ileostomy formation and before ileostomy closure, were collected. Preoperative blood tests were used as a baseline. Results collected included renal function, haemoglobin and electrolytes. The eGFR was calculated using the CKD-EPI creatinine equation.12 The primary outcome measure was the absolute change in serum creatinine and eGFR at ileostomy closure compared with baseline.

Ethics approval was granted by the Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital Human Research and Ethics Committee: HREC/2020/QRBW/62134.

Readmissions were defined as an unplanned readmission as an inpatient to a public hospital or health service in Queensland. Emergency department presentations without inpatient admission were not included. For each readmission as defined above, indication for readmission and date of readmission were collected.

Each readmission was interrogated for the reason for readmission. There was significant overlap between dehydration, high stoma output and AKI. To delineate the severity of these presentations, they were categorized as ‘dehydration with AKI’ or ‘dehydration without AKI’. AKI was defined according to the Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative's ‘RIFLE’ criteria.13 Dehydration was defined by criteria involving clinical, serological and urine abnormalities2 (Table 1).
Bias was minimized by identification of eligible patients from multiple data extracts from stoma therapy and centralized hospital service databases to ensure complete capture. All new ileostomy formations were included; if a patient had multiple ileostomy formations, only the original procedure was included. Patients were excluded if: they died within 60 days of discharge without readmission, their readmission information could not be accessed, they underwent ileostomy reversal within 60 days. Patients with incomplete data sets were excluded from analysis. The surgeons at the RBWH do not undertake early ileostomy closure and closures are scheduled after 3 months and when the distal anastomosis has healed.

Statistical analysis was performed using IBM SPSS, version 28 (SPSS Inc.) and Microsoft Excel (Microsoft Inc.), statistical significance was taken as P < 0.05. For continuous variables, independent students t-tests were used, for categorical variables chi-squared test and Fisher's exact test were used. Fisher's test was used when there was an expected value in a variables contingency table less than five. Variables with a significance of P < 0.1 were included for multivariate analysis via logistic regression. Paired students t-test was used to analyse the difference between blood results at baseline compared with ileostomy reversal.

Results
There were 245 patients identified through stomal therapy and hospital information service databases and examined for eligibility. Seventy-four patients were excluded (incomplete data, death in hospital or within 60 days of discharge, no ileostomy formation or duplicate patient). One hundred and seventy-one patients were eligible and included for analysis. There were 121 loop ileostomies and 50 end ileostomies formed. The mean age was 60 ± 15 years. Ileostomy reversal occurred in 45% (n = 77) of patients, with reversal occurring a median of 263.5 days post formation. Reversal occurred in n = 66 (54.5%) of loop ileostomies and n = 11 (22%) of end ileostomies. Thirty-eight percent (n = 65) of patients were readmitted within 60 days of discharge (Table 2). One patient was categorized as ASA 5 and not expected to survive. Ultimately, he recovered and underwent closure of his ileostomy at 1.5 years after the index procedure.
In baseline (pre-ileostomy) blood tests, serum sodium levels were lower (136.7 vs. 137.9, P = 0.018) in the readmission arm, after multivariate analysis. This significant difference was associated with a regression coefficient of −0.023 (95% CI, −0.004 to −0.041). There was no significant difference between remaining electrolytes, renal function and haemoglobin blood tests at baseline between readmission and no readmission arms. There was no significant difference in any electrolyte, renal function or haemoglobin blood test at time of ileostomy reversal between readmission and no readmission arms (Table 3).
There was a significant increase in creatinine from baseline blood tests to ileostomy closure in both the readmission (72.1 μmol/L ± 21.0 vs. 82.7 μmol/L ± 27.0, P = 0.038) and no readmission arms (84.3 μmol/L ± 32.2 vs. 95.7 μmol/L ± 34.6, P = 0.021). There was a significant decrease in eGFR from baseline blood tests to ileostomy closure in both the readmission (96.0 mL/min/1.73m2 ± 20.5 vs. 78.2 mL/min/1.73m2 ± 25.5, P = 0.001) and no readmission arms (86.2 mL/min/1.73m2 ± 25.4 vs. 67.7 mL/min/1.73m2 ± 28.9, P = 0.001).There was a significant increase in urea in the readmission arm (4.5 mmol/L ± 2.1 and 5.9 mmol/L ± 3.0, P = 0.006). There was a significant increase in total protein (60.3 g/L ± 11.9 and 64.7 g/L ± 7.6, P = 0.022) and albumin (32.6 g/L ± 8.6 and 36.2 g/L ± 4.5, P = 0.013) in the no readmission arm only. There was a significant decrease in serum sodium in the no readmission arm only from baseline blood tests to ileostomy closure (138.2 mmol/L ± 3.0 and 136.6 mmol/L ± 2.5, P = 0.005) (Table 4).
Discussion
This analysis of 171 ileostomy forming admissions in a Queensland tertiary hospital found an all-cause readmission rate of 38%. This is higher than the 60-day readmissions rates identified in the literature of 17–36%.7, 14 It is possible that the readmission rate is inflated as admissions to any hospital under the state's public health system were included. A policy of selective defunctioning would also see ileostomies chosen for the patients with the highest co-morbidities. Dehydration/AKI was the cause of readmission in 42% (n = 27) of cases, consistent with previously reported figures of 37–44%.4, 6-9

Ileostomy reversal was performed in 43% of cases (54% of loop ileostomies and 21% of end ileostomies). The literature reports that low anterior resection with diverting ileostomy has a reversal rate of 68–92%.15, 16 Anterior resection was the most common procedure in which ileostomies were formed in this investigation, however, the described cohort has a heterogenous indication for ileostomy formation including primary defunctioning ileostomy. Primary defunctioning ileostomies were frequently performed palliatively or secondary to anastomotic leak. Anastomotic leak is an independent risk factor for failure to reverse ileostomy17 and palliative diverting ileostomies are usually formed without intent for stoma closure. These factors likely lead to a lower overall rate of ileostomy reversal in this cohort. The colorectal surgeons at the RBWH have adopted a policy of selective defunctioning ileostomy formation for patients undergoing colorectal resections with a low pelvic extraperitoneal anastomosis.18, 19 It might be expected that those patients that do get defunctioned do so because of their higher perceived risk or pre-operative neoadjuvant therapy (Fig. 1).
The median time to ileostomy reversal was 263.5 days post-ileostomy formation. This is marginally longer than the reported median time to ileostomy closure, which ranges between 126 and 259 days.20-22 Risk factors identified with delayed closure and non-closure include anastomotic leak, cancer progression, adjuvant chemotherapy and longer length of stay.20-22 Although performing an analysis as to the cause of delayed closure is beyond the scope of this study, the studied cohort had a high median length of stay during their index procedure.

In this study, there was an observed decrease in renal function following ileostomy formation. Ileostomy formation is known to be an independent cause of kidney injury, with a risk that persists beyond ileostomy closure.10 Dehydration is the most common reason for readmission following ileostomy formation. Dehydration can precipitate an AKI which can have long term consequences on renal function. Transient impairments in renal function have been shown to be an independent risk factor for later development of chronic kidney disease.23 With readmissions frequently leading to AKI, it is anticipated that patients who had a readmission within 60 days of discharge would have a significantly greater reduction in eGFR when compared with patients who did not have a readmission. In this cohort, there was a statistically significant deterioration in renal function in groups who did and did not receive readmission within 60 days of discharge. Furthermore, there was no significant difference in creatinine or eGFR between groups at the time of ileostomy closure. It is likely that deteriorations in renal function are occurring in patients with an ileostomy, without patients realizing or without significant enough dehydration to require hospital admission. This information suggests more work is required to preserve renal function in all patients with an ileostomy.

Serum sodium at baseline was associated with an increased risk of readmission (OR 0.977, CI 0.996–0.960), that is, a drop of 1 mmol/L sodium increased the risk of readmission by 2.3%. This is likely because patients with hyponatremia are at an increased risk of AKI.24 Disturbances in electrolyte equilibrium in patients with an ileostomy can result in extracellular fluid volume depletion.25 The readmission cohort had a greater portion of hyponatremic patients which are at greater risk of AKI, the most frequent cause of readmission in the studied cohort. However, another study did not identify pre-ileostomy formation serum sodium as a predictor of readmission.6

Aside from serum sodium, there were no observed statistically significant differences in the baseline patient characteristics of the readmission and no readmission groups. This is important information; it is difficult to predict which patients are at risk of dehydration and readmission, and an approach to prevention may not be able to be targeted to suspected ‘high risk’ patients.

There was a statistically significant increase in albumin and total protein in the no readmission arm. It is unclear why this has been observed. The reduction in circulating plasma volume can lead to artificially high levels of albumin.26 It is possible that increased albumin and total protein reflect dehydration in these groups. There was a significant decrease in sodium from baseline to ileostomy closure in the no readmission arm of the study. It is expected with bypass of the colon, increased sodium losses would result, however, this was not observed in the readmission group. This may be because readmitted ileostomy patients typically receive intravenous fluids, which correct sodium derangement. There was a significant increase in urea from baseline to ileostomy closure in the readmission arm of the study. This was expected as urea is elevated in dehydration, which was the cause of readmission in 42% of cases.

The limitations of this study include the retrospective nature of the data collection and patient selection. While some statistically significant differences have been clearly identified, the absolute magnitude of the differences are small and may not be clinically apparent when routine blood tests are reviewed.

The Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital is a public hospital that treats a tertiary referral population along with the local community patients. These findings will be broadly applicable to similar tertiary hospitals but not necessarily to all general hospitals.

Conclusion
The formation of an ileostomy is associated with a statistically significant deterioration in renal function regardless of whether the patient experiences a clinically important episode of dehydration leading to hospital readmission. Any further study into methods of improving hydration will need to be implemented across the full spectrum of ileostomy patients.