Introduction
Protein homeostasis is highly regulated in cells and has been extensively linked to human disease when dysregulated.1,2 Protein ubiquitination is one of the primary mechanisms for the regulation of protein levels in cells, as well as many additional cellular processes, including signal transduction, gene expression, DNA repair, and protein trafficking.3−6 Ubiquitination is a highly specific post-translational modification in which the C-terminus of a single ubiquitin (Ub) or a polyubiquitin chain is covalently conjugated to lysine residues of a substrate, catalyzed by an Ub-activating (E1), Ub-conjugating (E2), and Ub-ligating (E3) enzymatic machinery.7 This enzymatic cascade can produce mono- or polyubiquitination (poly-Ub) of proteins, the latter with variable poly-Ub chain structures and lysine linkages, which determine different signaling pathways.

Ubiquitination is a reversible modification tightly regulated by deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) that catalyze the removal of ubiquitin chains from targeted proteins. While DUBs have been implicated in the regulation of many biological processes and are involved in pathogenic pathways,4,5 their function and natural substrates are largely underexplored.8 Among seven known and putative DUB families encoded by the human genome, the ubiquitin-specific proteases (USPs) comprise the largest subfamily (50+ proteins) with a conserved protease domain possessing a catalytic cysteine.9−11 Recently, USPs have emerged as novel targets for cancer treatment due to their over-expression and activation in various malignant tumors.12

USP21 is a prominent member of the USP subfamily playing a role in apoptosis, DNA repair, and signal transduction.13,14 USP21 downregulated tumor necrosis factor-α (TNFα)-induced nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) activation through deubiquitination of RIP115 and was reported to deubiquitinate RIG-I as well as STING to negatively regulate antiviral responses.16−18 Recent studies indicate the relevance of USP21 in promoting tumor development and growth, including in non-small cell lung cancer,19 bladder carcinoma,20 gastric cancer,21 hepatocellular carcinoma,22 basal-like breast cancer,23 cervical cancer,24 esophageal cancer,25 colorectal cancer,26 and pancreatic cancer.27

To assess the potential of DUBs as therapeutic targets, tool compounds (Cpd) are urgently needed to complement data derived from genetic target validation strategies. However, despite significant efforts, the identification of highly selective and potent small-molecule DUB inhibitors of chemical probe quality has remained a major challenge.28 To date, only a few USPs (e.g., USP7, USP1, USP9X, and USP30) have been targeted with high-quality chemical probes.28−37 Recently, disulfiram and 6-thioguanine were reported to synergistically inhibit USP2 and USP21 but with low affinity in the micromolar range.38 To investigate the cellular function of USP21 and explore its potential as a therapeutic cancer target, we developed the first highly potent and selective inhibitor for USP21. Herein, we present the discovery of BAY-805, a non-covalent, potent, selective, and cell-active inhibitor of the catalytic activity of USP21. This high-quality chemical probe will be a valuable tool to further investigate the complex biological pathways of USP21.

Results and Discussion
High-Throughput Screening of USP21 Inhibitors
Motivated by the relevance of USP21 as a promising target for cancer treatment, we screened ∼4 million compounds of the Bayer compound library to identify small molecules inhibiting the catalytic activity of USP21. To this end, we developed a USP21 activity assay that is based on the deubiquitination of a STING-derived peptide (a USP21-specific substrate17,18) by purified recombinant human full-length USP21 using time-resolved fluorescence resonance energy transfer (TR-FRET) technology (referred to as a homogeneous time-resolved fluorescence (HTRF)-assay, for details see the Supporting Information).39 Screening of compounds at a single concentration of 10 μM in the HTRF assay resulted in ∼10,000 primary hits with ≥30% inhibition, which was reconfirmed in triplicate retests. To filter out false-positive fluorescent compounds, hits were confirmed with an orthogonal luminescence-based (Ub-Aminoluciferin substrate, Ub-AML) or another fluorescence-based (Ub-rhodamine 110 substrate, Ub-Rhod) deubiquitination activity assay using Ub-AML40 and Ub-Rhod41 as generic USP21 substrates. This approach identified more than 2500 confirmed hits after additional verification in interference control and redox-cycling assays. To further characterize our primary hits in terms of DUB selectivity, we tested for inhibition of closely related USP2, 7, and 22 in Ub-rhodamine assays. Most of the screening hits turned out to be non-selective. However, a subsequent hit-to-lead process resulted in the identification of the 1,3,4-thiadiazol derivative 1 as the starting point for further structural optimization (Figure​Figure11).
Characterization of Screening Hit
Screening hit 1 already exhibited promising inhibitory activity on USP21 with a mean IC50 value of 11.8 μM in the HTRF assay. However, the inhibitory activity of 1 on USP21 was not confirmed up to 22.5 μM concentration in either of the orthogonal biochemical assays using Ub-rhodamine or Ub-AML as substrates. Therefore, we developed a binding/stabilization-based thermal shift assay (TSA) as a biophysical validation for on-target activity. Target engagement of screening hit 1 was confirmed via strong stabilization of USP21 of 4.9 °C at 100 μM concentration of compound 1 (Figure​Figure11D). Furthermore, no significant temperature shift was observed for USP2 and USP7 (Figure​Figure11), suggesting no off-target inhibition of structurally similar USPs. Additionally, we employed concentration-dependent SPR measurements to provide further proof of target engagement and to distinguish between specific target-binding and non-specific effects. The SPR experiment confirmed the specific binding to USP21 with a Kd value of 7.87 μM (Figure​Figure11A,B). To further characterize the screening hit in terms of selectivity, we screened compound 1 at two concentrations against a panel of 10 individual deubiquitinating enzymes (Figure​Figure11C). Besides USP21, none of the other tested DUB targets were inhibited >50% at 10 and 50 μM, which emphasizes the high USP selectivity of compound 1 and coincides with the TSA results for USP2 and USP7. Altogether, these observations prompted us to prioritize this singleton compound for further optimization toward a selective in vitro chemical probe for USP21.

Structure–Activity Relationship (SAR)
Initially, our primary focus of optimization was the improvement of affinity toward USP21. Due to the lack of structural information, we started a ligand-based SAR exploration by introducing different substituents at the R2 position (Table 1).
Replacement of the methyl group of screening hit 1 with hydrogen (compound 1) or an isopropyl substituent (compound 3) resulted in a complete loss of USP21 potency. Interestingly, compound 2 did not inhibit USP21 activity up to 25 μM in the HTRF and Ub-rhodamine assay but showed a significant TSA stabilization of USP21 of 3.5 °C. However, introducing a methoxymethyl group gave rise to derivative 4 with an improved IC50 value of 5870 and 7140 nM for HTRF and Ub-rhodamine assays, respectively. For the first time, we observed biochemical activity in the USP21 Ub-rhodamine assay while still being selective against USP2. This initial finding prompted us to select compound 4 for further optimization on the R3 substituent (Table 2).

In the next step, we focused on the SAR around the R3 substituent and replaced the lipophilic cyclopentyl group of 4 with a phenyl substituent leading to compound 5 with a potency comparable to screening hit 1. However, additional substituents on the aromatic ring did not result in any potency improvement (not shown). Interestingly, compound 6 with an isopropyl group proved inactive in both biochemical assays. In contrast, the cyclohexyl derivative 7 showed significantly improved submicromolar potency (∼8-fold for IC50 in HTRF) compared to compound 4. However, introducing an additional oxygen atom, as in compound 8, resulted again in a complete loss of activity. Likewise, a broad range of both saturated and unsaturated heterocyclic substituents (not shown) significantly diminished biochemical potency. We speculated that the R3 substituent points toward a lipophilic pocket and hydrophobic interactions are required for high in vitro activity. Based on the observed steep SAR, we decided to accelerate compound optimization by parallel synthesis, especially as we could not obtain a co-crystal structure of our inhibitors with USP21 to structurally guide our optimization efforts. Consequently, a broad range of substituents was introduced to the cyclohexyl group of 7. An additional methyl group at the attachment point of the cyclohexyl residue resulted in a 6-fold improvement of potency for compound 9 with IC50 values of 119 and 72 nM for HTRF and Ub-rhodamine, respectively. Stereoselective synthesis revealed the (R)-enantiomer 10 as a eutomer (IC50 = 74 nM for HTRF). Then, we intended to replace the nitro group to avoid obvious toxicity issues. The isosteric replacement of nitro by a cyano substituent resulted in compound 11 with comparable potency. Additionally, the topological polar surface area (TPSA) dropped to 117 Å2, improving the potential for favorable permeability properties. Compound 11 represented the first derivative of screening hit 1, which fulfilled the probe criteria with respect to the potency of <100 nM in biochemical assays and still high selectivity against USP2 (>780-fold). However, compound 11 displayed only partial USP21 inhibition in the Ub-rhodamine assay, with an efficacy of only <40% (see the Supporting Information).

Cellular Profiling of Compound 11
Our first optimization campaign resulted in compounds with significantly improved biochemical potency and high selectivity against USP2. As a next step, we investigated the cellular downstream effect of compound 11. Yang and colleagues reported that USP21 inhibition induces NF-κB activation by preventing deubiquitination of RIP1.15 K63 ubiquitinated RIP1 is required for NF-κB activation, and thus USP21-mediated deubiquitination of RIP1 shuts down the NF-κB pathway. To demonstrate the cellular effect of compound 11 on the NF-κB pathway (Figure​Figure22A), we re-established Yang’s cell-based NF-κB dual-luciferase reporter assay. As the catalytic cysteine of USP21 is mainly responsible for the deubiquitinating enzymatic activity,54–57 expression of C221R mutant USP21 in cells revealed a strong NF-κB activation and, thereby, increase in the luciferase signal (Figure​Figure22B). Accordingly, the USP21 mutant was implemented as a positive control for effective USP21 inhibition in the cellular system. In contrast, compound 11 showed, unexpectedly, no NF-κB activation up to a concentration of 10 μM (see Figure​Figure22C).

The absence of any significant activity of compound 11 in the cellular NF-κB reporter assay prompted us to establish a cellular thermal shift assay (CETSA) to investigate cell permeability and cellular target engagement (Figure​Figure33A). In particular, we utilized a HiBiT CETSA assay format42,43 conducted in intact HEK293T cells. Cells were transfected with USP21 fused to a small proluminescent NanoLuc HiBiT tag, which, when complemented with the Large BiT NanoLuc fragment, produces a quantifiable luminescence signal. Target engagement of HiBiT fusion proteins with compounds stabilizes the proteins in a native cellular environment, allowing them to withstand higher temperatures before denaturing, aggregating, and degrading the luminescence signal. Interestingly, compound 11 induced strong stabilization of USP21 at 49 °C compared to DMSO control (see Figure​Figure33B) which confirmed the binding of 11 to the USP21 protein in the cellular system.

Up to this point, it remained unclear whether limited permeability and/or cellular target engagement contributed to the observed disconnect between biochemical and cellular activity. As compound 11 already showed nanomolar biochemical potency, we speculated that the partial inhibition of USP21 activity (as observed with low efficacy in the Ub-rhodamine assay) did not effectively translate into NF-κB activation in the cell-based reporter assay. Therefore, the next step was to optimize our compounds toward full inhibition of USP21 activity. Thus, improvement of efficacy in both biochemical assays appeared to be our main optimization parameter.

Optimization of USP21 Inhibition Efficacy
We investigated the SAR of the five-membered heteroaromatic core of compound 11 by varying either of the nitrogen atoms of the 1,3,4-thiadiazole individually (see Table 3). Interestingly, thiazole derivatives 12 and 13 displayed good potency in the HTRF assay but proved inactive in the Ub-rhodamine assay, most likely due to even lower efficacy compared to compound 11. Additionally, the replacement of the nitrogen atom by C-methyl led to increased lipophilicity at pH 7.5 and a significantly lower aqueous solubility. Therefore, we maintained the 1,3,4-thiadiazole motif and turned our attention to the substitution pattern at the cyclohexyl ring.

In general, lipophilic substituents at the R4-position were well tolerated in terms of potency. Namely, compound 14 with an ethyl group already showed improved potency and efficacy in both biochemical assays, whereas the activity dropped significantly for the methoxy-substituted derivative 15. Introducing fluorines to the methyl group of 11 provided equipotent compounds (Ub-rhodamine: IC50 = 32 nM for 16 and IC50 = 36 nM for 17). The striking difference was the significantly improved efficacy in the Ub-rhodamine assay compared to compound 11, which was notably observed for compound 17.

Based on the efficacy improvement of compound 17, we reinvestigated the SAR for substituent R2 (see Table 4). Introducing a hydroxymethyl group provided compound 18 with a ∼3-fold enhanced potency and significantly improved aqueous solubility, yet, with lower efficacy in both biochemical assays and strong efflux in the Caco-2-assay (efflux ratio (ER) of 14).

Additional methyl groups, as in compound 19, resulted in slightly reduced potency. To our surprise, the installation of cyclopentyl and isobutyl groups as R2 substituents yielded compounds 20 and 21 with single-digit nanomolar inhibitory activity for USP21 (based on IC50 values in the Ub-rhodamine assay). At the same time, compound 21 displayed almost full USP21 inhibitory efficacy in both biochemical assays and improved Caco-2 cell permeability (Papp = 42 nm/s, efflux ratio = 0.7), likely resulting from the reduced TPSA of this replacement. The corresponding (S)-enantiomer 22 turned out to be 2100-fold (based on HTRF) and 8100-fold (based on Ub-rhodamine) less potent compared to 21 and may therefore serve as a structurally close negative control (see below).

Cellular Profiling
Encouraged by the significant potency and efficacy improvements, we profiled compounds of Table 4 in the C-terminally HiBiT-tagged USP21 CETSA (see Figure​Figure44). Strong thermal stabilization of USP21 was observed for compounds 20 and 21, resulting from optimization toward low nanomolar biochemical activity. Likewise, strong cellular target engagement was confirmed for compound 18; however, it only showed moderate efficacy in both biochemical assays and low permeability through Caco-2 cells. In contrast, the significantly less potent enantiomer 22 did not substantially affect the thermal stability of USP21 compared to the DMSO control.

Subsequently, we tested compounds 17–22 for cellular activity in the NF-κB reporter assay in comparison to compound 11 (see Figure​Figure55). Cellular inhibition of USP21 with compound 20 showed significant NF-κB activation levels; however, when compared to treatment with compound 21, the NF-κB activation level is less pronounced. For the first time in our hands, the observed cellular target engagement of our USP21 inhibitors translated into cellular activity. As outlined by our results, low nanomolar biochemical potency and high efficacy in both biochemical assays translated into the anticipated activation of the NF-κB pathway. The less active enantiomer 22 mildly increased cellular NF-κB levels at 10 μM compound concentration. However, cellular activity was not observed for compound 18, although a strong thermal stabilization of USP21 was confirmed in the HiBiT CETSA. The apparent disconnect between cellular target engagement and activity in the NF-κB reporter assay of compound 18 prompted us to investigate ligand-binding to USP21 with SPR experiments.

Competitive Binding
We established an SPR-based competition assay to investigate the competitive binding between wild-type ubiquitin as a physiological substrate of USP21 and compounds 18 and 21. First, we analyzed the binding kinetics of the two compounds to USP21 in the absence of the ubiquitin substrate. The two competitors, 18 and 21, despite having similar binding affinities with Kd values of 5.8 and 2.2 nM, respectively, differ more significantly in their binding kinetics (Figure​Figure66). The binding of compound 21 to USP21 is characterized by a slower on- and off-rate compared to 18, resulting in an increased half-life for the respective protein–ligand complex.

Subsequently, we studied ubiquitin binding to USP21 in the presence of compounds 18 and 21. For both compounds, increasing ubiquitin concentration resulted in a gradual displacement of the inhibitors allowing ubiquitin to bind to USP21 (Figure​Figure77). In direct comparison, significantly less ubiquitin binding to USP21 was observed in the presence of 21. Consequently, compound 21 shows the strongest competition effect and effectively prevents ubiquitin binding. The observed low off-rate for compound 21 probably leads to a strong USP21 occupancy. Both effects are less pronounced for compound 18 and may explain the absence of cellular activity in the NF-κB reporter assay.

Cellular Potency
Based on our results, we selected compound 21 as a chemical probe and compound 22 as a corresponding negative control for in-depth cellular target engagement profiling. First, we studied the USP21 interaction of 21 and 22 at different temperatures with the C-terminal HiBiT-tagged USP21 CETSA (Figure​Figure88). In comparison to DMSO control and the less potent enantiomer 22, compound 21 revealed strong ligand-induced protein stabilization resulting in a substantial thermal shift in the melt curve of USP21 (∼4 °C difference).

For comparative compound profiling, we determined CETSA potencies based on concentration-response experiments resulting in EC50 of 95 nM and >100 μM (using compound 21 as the top constraint in the EC50 calculation) at 49 °C for compounds 21 and 22, respectively (Figure​Figure99).
Additionally, we measured the cellular potency for both compounds in the NF-κB reporter assay (Figure​Figure1010). As a result, compound 21 induced cellular NF-κB activation with an EC50 of 17 nM, whereas enantiomer 22 did not show substantial cellular activity. Therefore, we confirmed the nanomolar activity of compound 21 in both biochemical and cellular assays.
Antiproliferative Activity
After demonstrating cellular target engagement and the effect on NF-κB, we investigated whether USP21 inhibition affects the cell viability of different human tumor cell lines. However, no antiproliferative effect was observed in Jurkat, Molm-13, A549, MDA-MB-231, and U2OS cell lines up to 30 μM concentration of compounds 21 and 22, respectively.

DUB Selectivity Profiling
As a next step, we investigated the selectivity within the target family and profiled compounds 21 and 22 in the Structural Genomics Consortium (SGC) DUB panel comprising 10 individual USPs (see Figure​Figure1111). As a result, 21 displayed a strong inhibitory effect on USP21 activity at 10 and 50 μM and less than 50% inhibition for seven other DUBs of the panel. However, we observed a slight activity on USP10 and USP22 with about 50% residual DUB activity for both enzymes. To determine potential non-specific inhibition more accurately, we measured IC50 values for both proteins. In this attempt, inhibition of USP10 and USP22 DUB activity was not observed, whereas IC50 data for USP21 were reproducible (see Figure​Figure1111B–D). Accordingly, compound 22 did not show a significant effect on the activity of any of the tested DUB targets at 10 and 50 μM concentrations.
In addition, we also screened compounds 21 and 22 in the DUBprofiler (Ubiquigent) across 44 individual DUB targets in a dose–response assessment at 1 and 10 μM concentrations (see the Supporting Information).44 Both compounds showed very low activity (<15% inhibition) across various DUBs, while compound 21 showed 91 and 88% inhibition of USP21 at 10 and 1 μM concentrations, respectively, and thus demonstrates high selectivity for the inhibition of USP21 (Figure​Figure1212).
Off-Target Profiling
We extended the off-target screening and profiled compounds 21 and 22 in a safety screen against 70 individual off-targets, including enzymes, receptors, transporter, ion channels, etc. (see the Supporting Information). Compound 21 was tested at 10 μM concentration with only acetylcholine esterase and adenosine transporters being inhibited with 72% (IC50 = 7.61 μM) and 62%, respectively. Likewise, a moderate effect of 22 on acetylcholinesterase was observed with 75% inhibition at 10 μM. In addition, compounds 21 and 22 were also tested in-house against six cysteine proteases (all IC50 > 20 μM) and in a kinase selectivity panel (Eurofins/Panlabs) against more than 360 kinases at 10 μM concentration (see the Supporting Information). Minor inhibitory activity of compound 21 was noted for PRAK(h) (58% inhibition, IC50 = 8.6 μM) and TrkA(h) (57% inhibition, IC50 > 10 μM). Overall, both compounds exhibit favorable selectivity profiles not only within the DUB target family but also against several off-targets.

Chemical Probe
Based on the overall pharmacological profile, compound 21 surpasses the stringent target-related criteria for chemical probes45−48 typically applied by the SGC48 and others (see Figure​Figure1313). BAY-805 (21) is a highly potent inhibitor with low nanomolar potency in biochemical and cellular assays and shows impressive selectivity not only within the DUB family but also against various off-targets. Binding and cellular target engagement have been demonstrated with high affinity in SPR experiments and strong thermal stabilization in the C-terminally tagged HiBiT USP21 CETSA. Additionally, we provide the less potent enantiomer BAY-728 (22) as valuable negative control that was profiled concomitantly to our probe.
Physicochemical and In Vitro DMPK Profiles
Finally, we investigated the solubility and stability of compound 21 in physicochemical and in vitro DMPK assays. Thereby, compound 21 revealed decent physicochemical properties, such as sufficient aqueous solubility for in vitro pharmacological assays in combination with excellent plasma and hydrolytic stability at different pH values (Figure​Figure1313). Additionally, compound 21 exhibits moderate lipophilicity with a log D value resulting in a good lipophilic ligand efficiency (LLE) of 5.1 based on the IC50 in the Ub-rhodamine assay. Along with a favorable TPSA of 108 Å, compound 21 showed moderate permeability in combination with a low efflux ratio (Papp = 42 nm/s, efflux ratio = 0.6) in the Caco-2 assay. Upon incubation with rat hepatocytes, compound 21 exhibits rather low metabolic stability (CL = 3.8 L/(h kg)). Furthermore, compound 21 showed low micromolar inhibitory activity on cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes, in particular on CYP3A4.

Synthesis of BAY-805
The modular structure of our USP21 inhibitors allowed us to develop a straightforward and highly efficient synthesis (Scheme 1). Our short synthetic route comprised only four linear steps and was designed to be easily applicable to parallel synthesis allowing for rapid optimization of screening hit 1. For the synthesis of compound 21, building block 25 was prepared on a multigram scale starting from commercially available 4-cyanophenylacetonitrile (23), which was reacted with thiosemicarbazide (24) in trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Subsequent coupling with Boc-d-leucine (26) provided intermediate 27. Boc-deprotection with 4 N HCl in dioxane followed by amide coupling with 1-(trifluoromethyl)-cyclohexanecarboxylic acid gave rise to compound 21 (BAY-805).
In analogy, the negative control compound 22 was synthesized using Boc-l-leucine in the first amide coupling step. Detailed descriptions for the synthesis of screening hit 1 and derivatives 2–22 can be found in the Experimental Section and Supporting Information.

Conclusions
In our pursuit of new anticancer drugs, we screened ∼4 million compounds of the Bayer compound library on USP21 using a biochemical HTRF assay and identified potent and selective USP21 inhibitors following optimization of screening hit 1 via parallel synthesis. Cellular target engagement for key compounds was confirmed with CETSA. However, only compounds displaying high potency and efficacy in both the HTRF and Ub-rhodamine biochemical assays were able to demonstrate a USP21 inhibitory effect in a cellular NF-κB reporter assay. Consequently, we directed our chemistry optimization efforts toward improving potency and efficacy in the USP21 Ub-rhodamine assay, culminating in the identification of BAY-805 (21), a single-digit nanomolar inhibitor of USP21 with high selectivity versus DUB family members and a variety of off-targets. NF-κB levels were strongly increased in the presence of BAY-805 (21) to an extent comparable to those of a USP21 catalytic-dead mutant. Importantly, using BAY-805, we were able to demonstrate, for the first time, the relevance of USP21 chemical inhibition for the enhancement of the NF-κB pathway. To the best of our knowledge, BAY-805 (21) constitutes the first highly potent USP21 chemical probe with an extensively characterized on- and off-target profile. BAY-805 (21) surpasses the stringent criteria for chemical probes typically applied by the SGC48 and others, including the availability of its less active enantiomer BAY-728 (22) as a corresponding negative control.46,49,50 Both compounds will be available upon request51 and are recommended to be used in cellular studies to interrogate the function of USP21 in normal physiology and multiple diseases, from viral infections to cancers.52
