1 INTRODUCTION
Gout is a common chronic disease caused by the deposition of monosodium urate (MSU) crystals within joints as well as other tissues.1 It is characterized by recurrent painful episodes of acute joint inflammation or “gout flares” that occur in response to deposited MSU crystals.2 Studies in both peritoneal macrophages and the THP-1 cell line have established the central role of the NLRP3 inflammasome in MSU crystal-induced inflammation and gout flares.3

Once formed, MSU crystal deposits persist in joints for prolonged periods of time, but gout flares only occur sporadically.4, 5 NLRP3 inflammasome activation is a two-step process involving synthesis and then assembly of inflammasome components. Phagocytosis of MSU crystals by macrophages can be sufficient to induce NLRP3 inflammasome activation alone6 and in vitro, MSU crystal exposure is a reliable means of inducing NLRP3 inflammasome activation in macrophages.3 However, this does not always occur in vivo7 and is thought to arise only when small shards of MSU crystals break away from the larger crystal deposit in sufficient amounts to trigger both steps of the NLRP3 inflammasome activating process.8 In other cases, exposure to MSU crystals results in priming of the inflammasome for activation through upregulation of inflammatory cytokines that promote inflammasome assembly7, 9 but is insufficient to trigger both steps of the NLRP3 inflammasome activation process alone. As a consequence, exposure to another factor (e.g. free fatty acids) that would normally only minimally activate the inflammasome now triggers an over-exaggerated NLRP3 inflammasome response.10

An unusual feature of gout flares is that they frequently develop during late night and early morning. The nocturnal patterning of gout flares has long been recognized and is reflected in the classic description of gout from Thomas Sydenham in 1683: “The victim goes to bed and sleeps in good health. About 2 o'clock in the morning, he is awakened by a severe pain in the great toe; more rarely in the heel, ankle or instep”.2 Contemporary epidemiological studies have validated these clinical observations finding the risk of gout flare is 2.36 times higher during the early morning (12:00–7:59 am) than during the daytime (8 am to 3:59 pm) and 1.26 times higher during the evening (4:00–11:59 pm) than during the daytime.11 This time-of-day patterning of flare susceptibility is of interest as NLRP3 inflammasome activity, inflammatory cytokine synthesis, and trafficking of immune cells are known to be under circadian clock control.12, 13

The mammalian circadian clock system consists of a light-sensitive central clock located in the suprachiasmatic nuclei of the hypothalamus and peripheral clocks, which are present in almost all other cells including immune cells.14 Central and peripheral clocks are molecularly identical consisting of a core transcription/translation feedback loop organized into positive and negative limbs.14 BMAL1 (Brain and Muscle ARNT-like-1) and CLOCK (Circadian Locomotor Output Cycles Kaput) form the positive limb. Acting as a dimer, BMAL1:CLOCK activate transcription of the negative limb which is comprised of members of the Cryptochrome (CRY1, CRY2) and Period (PER1, PER2, PER3) families.14 CRY and PER proteins form a dimer that inhibits CLOCK/BMAL1 activity. Auxiliary clock components (e.g. REV-ERBα and retinoic-acid receptor-related orphan receptor alpha (RORα)) act to control the expression of both the positive and negative limbs and as a result expression of clock components oscillates in a self-sustaining cycle with one oscillation every 24 h (Figure 1). Each core and auxiliary clock component regulates different cellular processes generating circadian rhythms in cell activity.
Circadian rhythms in both adaptive and innate immune responses have been well documented.15 Of potential relevance for gout, REV-ERBα has been shown to repress NLRP3 inflammasome activation.12 Numerous studies have demonstrated that the expression of circadian clock components often changes in response to stress or pathology (reviewed in Ref. [13]). Changes in the expression of clock components in immune cells have been shown to lead to altered inflammatory response and immune function13 including NLRP3 inflammasome activity.12 The purpose of this study was to determine whether the presence of MSU crystals results in changes in the circadian clock in THP-1 macrophages, a well-established model of MSU crystal-induced inflammasome activation,3 and if so, whether this causes time-of-day differences in MSU crystal-induced NLRP3 inflammasome activity in these cells.

2 MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1 Cell culture and treatment
The THP-1 human monocyte/macrophage cell line was grown in RPMI-1640 media containing 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1.0 mM sodium pyruvate and 1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37°C in 5% CO2. Macrophage-like cell differentiation was induced by treatment with 200 nM phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) for 3 days to induce phagocytic ability and constitutive production of pro-IL-1β.16 Differentiation markers, CD14 and CD36 were measured to confirm the effects of PMA treatment (data not shown). These cells are herein referred to as THP-1 macrophages.

2.2 Monosodium urate crystal synthesis
Endotoxin-free MSU crystals were manufactured using the protocol described by Denko et al.17 and used at a concentration of 500 μg/mL consistent with previous studies.18-21

2.3 Studies on time-of-day effects of monosodium urate crystal exposure and/or cell treatments
Serum shock, an in vitro clock re-setting stimulus (zeitgeber) was used to synchronize and re-set clocks within the THP-1 cell population.22 To investigate the effect of MSU crystal exposure on the expression of core circadian components, THP-1 monocytes and THP-1 macrophages were serum starved for 18 h (RPMI-1640 without FBS) and then re-fed with serum-replete media (RPMI-1640 media containing 10% FBS) with/without MSU crystals (500 μg/mL). Cell lysates were collected immediately prior to re-feeding and MSU crystal treatment (“0 h”) and at subsequent 4-hourly or 6-hourly intervals for a 24 h period for analysis of RNA-level and protein-level expression of circadian clock components, respectively, by real-time PCR and western blotting.

2.4 Real-time PCR
RNA was extracted from THP-1 cells using TRizol® coupled with a Quick-RNA Miniprep kit (ZYMO Research, Irvine, CA, USA) and cDNA synthesized using Superscript III and random primers (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Real-time qPCR was carried out using commercially available primers (Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA, USA) and SYBR Select master mix (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using a QuantStudio 12 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Primer sequences are listed in Table S1. Data were analyzed using the delta cT method, using ribosomal 18S gene as the reference.

2.5 Western blotting
Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer supplemented with sodium orthovanadate, sodium fluoride, and PMSF (1 mM each), and protein concentration was measured using the Pierce 660 Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Western blotting was carried out using standard protocols with β-actin as the loading control. Antibodies used are listed in Table S2.

2.6 ELISA
Secreted IL-1β protein levels were measured in the cell culture supernatant using a Duoset Human IL-1β ELISA kit (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA) following the manufacturer's protocol.

2.7 Adenoviral transduction
Commercially available recombinant adenoviral vectors were used to over-express or knockdown BMAL1 with adenoviral vectors expressing GFP or non-targeting shRNA (SCRMB) as controls (catalogue numbers ADV-201453 ad-h-ARNL, shADV-201 453 Ad-GFP-U6-h-ARNTL, 1060, ad-CMV-GFP and 1122. ad-GFP-U6-scrmb-shRNA, Vector Biolabs, Malvern, PA, USA). Cells were incubated with viral vectors at an MOI of 200 for 24 h at 37°C at 5% CO2, then media changed to fresh RPMI/10% FBS. The success of viral transduction was confirmed by measuring BMAL1 expression by real-time RT-qPCR. Transduction efficiency (determined by quantifying GFP-positive cell number) was approximately 60%–70%. Transduction with viral vector controls alone had no effect on caspase 1 activity (Figure S1).

2.8 REV-ERBα agonist/antagonist treatment
To determine the effect of REV-ERBα on the regulation of NLRP3 inflammasome activity, heme (an endogenous REV-ERBα agonist) and SR8278 (REV-ERBα antagonist) were used at concentrations of 30 and 1 μM, respectively, consistent with endogenous concentrations of heme in circulation23 and the concentration of SR8278 previously reported to antagonize heme-mediated REV-ERBα activation.24 NaOH (0.1M) and DMSO (0.1%) were used as vehicle controls for heme and SR8278, respectively. Treatment with vehicle control alone had no effect on caspase 1 activity (Figure S1).

2.9 Caspase-1 activity assay
Caspase-1 activity was measured using the Caspase-Glo® 1 inflammasome assay (Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA) and normalized to cell number determined using the Cyquant Cell Proliferation Assay (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with reference to a standard curve. Both assays were performed following the manufacturers' protocols.

2.10 Statistical analysis
All experiments were independently replicated a minimum of three times with a minimum of three technical replicates per experiment. The Spearman's test for heteroscedasticity, Anderson-Darling, D'Agostino-Pearson omnibus, Shapiro–Wilk and Kolmogorov–Smirnov tests for normality were used to determine whether data conformed to the requirements for the general linear model. Time-course real-time PCR data were log-transformed and analyzed by two-way ANOVA with Gaussier-Greenhouse correction and post-hoc Tukey testing. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test with post-hoc Holm-Šídák was used if data remained non-parametric after log transformation. All other data were parametric and analyzed by one-way ANOVA with post-hoc Tukey testing or by t-test if only two groups were being compared. All data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism version 9.0. A p-value of <.05 was considered statistically significant. Data are expressed as mean ± SEM.

3 RESULTS
3.1 Monosodium urate crystals alter the expression of circadian clock components in THP-1 macrophages but have minimal effects in THP-1 monocytes
In THP-1 macrophages, MSU crystal exposure resulted in increased PER2 (Figure 2A) and CRY1 expression (Figure 2B) (main effect of treatment p < .0001 and p = .0063, respectively) and an altered pattern of expression of BMAL1 (Figure 2C) and REV-ERBα (Figure 2D, time x treatment p < .0001 for both). There were no significant effects on other clock components (Figure 2E–H). For comparison, the effects of MSU crystals on THP-1 monocytes were also examined. A significant difference in the overall pattern of expression of PER2 across the 24 h period (time x treatment p = .0024) was evident in MSU crystal-treated cells; however, there were no other significant effects of MSU crystal exposure on circadian clock gene expression in THP-1 monocytic cells (Figure S2).
Since BMAL1 and REV-ERBα are known to regulate inflammation and/or the NLRP3 inflammasome12, 13 these clock components were selected as the focus for further study. By western blot, both BMAL1 and REV-ERBα protein levels were found to be significantly lower in MSU crystal-exposed THP-1 macrophages compared with non-MSU crystal-exposed cells across the 24 h period (treatment effect p = .0186 and p = .0006, respectively, Figure 3A,B. Full-length blots are shown in Figure S3).
3.2 The effect of monosodium urate crystals on NLRP3 inflammasome activation is time of day dependent
To determine if there are time-of-day differences in MSU crystal-induced NLRP3 inflammasome activation, THP-1 macrophages were serum starved for 18 h then re-fed with serum-replete media to re-set cell clocks22 and either treated immediately with MSU crystals (“0–12 h”) or following a 12 h delay (“12–24 h”). In each case, caspase 1 activity was measured after 12 h of MSU crystal exposure. The experimental outline is described in Figure 4A.
The magnitude of increase in caspase 1 activity induced by MSU crystal exposure was greater at the 0–12 h timepoint compared with 12–24 h (Figure 4B) indicating time-of-day differences in the responsiveness to MSU crystal exposure. To confirm these data, IL-1β protein levels were measured in cell supernatant at the two timepoints. The magnitude of increase in secreted IL-1β levels was also greater at the 0–12 h compared with 12–24 h timepoint (Figure 4C).

3.3 BMAL1 exhibits time-of-day-dependent repression of monosodium urate crystal-induced NLRP3 inflammasome activation
To establish whether time-of-day differences in BMAL1 levels may contribute to the time-of-day difference in MSU-crystal-induced caspase 1 activity, BMAL1 was knocked down or over-expressed using adenoviral vectors in THP-1 macrophages and the success of transduction confirmed by RT-qPCR (Figure S4). The effect of MSU crystal exposure on caspase 1 activity was assessed at the 0–12 and 12–24 h time points following the same experimental protocol as outlined in Figure 4A.

Knockdown of BMAL1 had no significant effect on caspase-1 activity at the 0–12 h timepoint (Figure 5A) when BMAL1 levels were naturally low (Figure 5A) but resulted in a further increase in caspase-1 activity in MSU crystal exposed cells at the 12–24 h timepoint (Figure 5B) when BMAL1 levels were naturally high (Figure 5A). Overexpression of BMAL1 repressed MSU crystal-induced caspase 1 activity at both timepoints (Figure 5C,D). There was no significant effect of BMAL1 knockdown or over-expression on caspase 1 activity in non-MSU crystal exposed cells (Figure 5A–D).
Next levels of secreted IL-1β were measured in cell supernatants collected at the two timepoints from cells following knockdown or overexpression of BMAL1. Knockdown of BMAL1 had no significant effect on levels of secreted IL-1β at the 0–12 h timepoint but resulted in further enhancement of MSU crystal-induced IL-1β secretion at the 12–24 h timepoint (Figure 5E,F, respectively). In contrast, overexpression of BMAL1 prevented the MSU crystal-induced increase in IL-1β protein levels at both timepoints but had no effect on IL-1β levels in non-MSU crystal exposed cells (Figure 5G,H).

We then determined the effect of BMAL1 knockdown and over-expression on NLRP3, pro-IL-1β, and CASP1 (Caspase-1) expression. BMAL1 knockdown or over-expression had no significant effect on NLRP3 expression in either MSU crystal treated or untreated THP-1 macrophages at either the 0–12 h or 12–24 timepoint (Figure 6A–D). In contrast, while BMAL1 knockdown had no significant effect on the expression of pro-IL-1β at the 0–12 h timepoint (Figure 6E) it resulted in further upregulation of pro-IL-1β expression in MSU crystal-exposed cells at the 12–24 h timepoint (Figure 6F). Conversely, pro-IL-1β expression was significantly lower in MSU crystal-treated cells over-expressing BMAL1 compared with MSU crystal-treated GFP controls at both the 0–12 and 12–24 h timepoints (Figure 6G,H). Knockdown of BMAL1 had no significant effect on CASP1 expression at the 0–12 h timepoint (Figure 6I) but exacerbated the MSU crystal-induced upregulation of CASP1 at the 12–24 h timepoint (Figure 6J). Overexpression of BMAL1 ameliorated the MSU crystal-induced increase in CASP1 expression at both timepoints and resulted in a significant reduction in basal CASP1 expression in non-MSU crystal-treated cells at both timepoints. (Figure 6K,L).
3.4 REV-ERBα represses monosodium urate crystal-induced NLRP3 inflammasome activation
To determine the effects of REV-ERBα on MSU crystal-induced caspase 1 activation, THP-1 macrophages were treated with the endogenous REV-ERBα agonist heme (30 μM) with/without the REV-ERBα antagonist SR8278 (1 μM). As for BMAL1, the effects of heme and SR8278 were determined in cells treated over the 0–12 and 12–24 h time periods.

A repressive effect of heme on MSU crystal-induced caspase 1 activity was evident at both the 0–12 and 12–24 h time points (Figure 7A,B). Co-treatment with REV-ERBα antagonist SR8278 attenuated the effects of heme at both timepoints confirming that the effects of heme were REV-ERBα-dependent. There was no significant effect of either heme or REV-ERBα antagonist on caspase-1 activity in non-MSU crystal exposed cells.
Similarly, treatment with heme prevented the MSU crystal-induced increase in secreted IL-1β at both the 0–12 and 12–24 h timepoints, and this effect was blocked by co-treatment with SR8278 at both timepoints (Figure 7C,D).

Next, we assessed the effect of heme and the REV-ERBα antagonist on the expression of NLRP3, pro-IL-1β, and CASP1. Treatment with heme resulted in a significant reduction in MSU crystal-induced NLRP3 expression and this effect was attenuated by co-treatment with SR8278 at both the 0–12 and 12–24 h timepoints (Figure 8A,B). Similarly, heme ameliorated the MSU crystal-induced increase in pro-IL-1β expression at both 0–12 and 12–24 h and this effect was blocked by co-treatment with SR8278 at both timepoints (Figure 8C,D). Treatment with both SR8278 alone and in combination with heme resulted in a significant increase in CASP1 expression in non-MSU crystal treated cells at both the 0–12 and 12–24 h timepoints. Heme treatment prevented the MSU-crystal-induced increase in CASP1 expression at both timepoints and this effect was abrogated by co-treatment with SR8278.
4 DISCUSSION
This study demonstrated that MSU crystals induce changes in the expression of circadian clock components in THP-1 macrophages, an established cell model for MSU-associated inflammasome activation.3 We found expression of the negative limb clock components, PER2 and CRY1 was increased, and protein levels of the positive limb component BMAL1, and auxiliary clock component REV-ERBα reduced, following MSU crystal exposure.

The circadian clock is known to control immune cell function and inflammation and both REV-ERBα and BMAL1 have previously been shown to have anti-inflammatory effects.12, 13 Here we found that REV-ERBα and BMAL1 repressed MSU crystal-induced NLRP3 inflammasome activation indicating that the reduction in BMAL1 and REV-ERBα caused by MSU crystal exposure contributes to the mechanism by which MSU crystals promote inflammasome activation. REV-ERBα is a nuclear receptor which, upon activation, acts as a transcriptional repressor. Of particular relevance, the NLRP3 promoter contains a REV-ERBα response element and in an experimental colitis model, NLRP3 has been shown to be a direct target of REV-ERBα-mediated transcriptional repression.12 Consistent with this, we found REV-ERBα repressed NLRP3 expression in MSU crystal-exposed cells indicating that at least part of the mechanism by which REV-ERBα inhibited the inflammasome was through transcriptional repression of NLRP3.

BMAL1 is also a transcriptional regulator and both BMAL1 and REV-ERBα reciprocally regulate BMAL1 and REV-ERBα expression. It is, therefore, likely that the altered time-of-day pattern of BMAL1 and REV-ERBα mRNA levels that we observed in MSU crystal-exposed THP-1 macrophages was at least partially a result of reduced BMAL1 and REV-ERBα protein levels. Unlike REV-ERBα, we found no evidence that BMAL1 repressed NLRP3 expression in MSU crystal-exposed THP-1 macrophages indicating that the activity of BMAL1 was independent of REV-ERBα. BMAL1 is known to regulate a number of pro-inflammatory pathways such as NF-κB signaling, toll-like receptor (TLR) activation, and inflammatory cytokine synthesis,25, 26 all of which are involved in NLRP3 inflammasome activation.27, 28 Here we found that BMAL1 repressed expression of both pro-IL-1β and CASP1 in MSU crystal-exposed THP-1 macrophages.

In the present study, REV-ERBα protein levels and the repressive effects of REV-ERBα on MSU crystal-induced NLRP3 inflammasome activity showed no significant time-of-day variation. In contrast, a marked time-of-day difference in BMAL1 protein levels was apparent, and the repressive effects of BMAL1 on NLRP3 inflammasome activation were restricted to the time-of-day when BMAL1 protein levels were abundant. The overall magnitude of MSU crystal-induced NLRP3 inflammasome activation in THP-1 macrophages also differed depending on time-of-day of measurement with maximal activity coinciding with the period during which BMAL1 levels were naturally low. Our data suggest that macrophages are more susceptible to inflammasome-activating stimuli during the time of day when BMAL1 levels are naturally low and that this vulnerability is further exacerbated by MSU crystal exposure which results in suppression of REV-ERBα as well as further suppression of BMAL1 (Figure 9).
Our findings are limited to the THP-1 cell line; however, these cells have been shown to recapitulate mechanisms of gouty inflammation and are a well-established model for studying the molecular mechanisms of gout flares.3 In support of the potential clinical relevance of our findings, the circadian clock signaling pathway was recently identified as an altered pathway in MSU crystal-exposed human and mouse bone marrow–derived macrophages following gene ontology analysis of RNA-seq data.29 Although it is not possible to correlate circadian clock cycling in cells grown in vitro with “day” and “night”, in mouse spleen macrophages as well as other peripheral tissue cells, BMAL1 levels and/or activity have been shown to be highest during the day and lowest at night.30-32 Whether human macrophages show the same rhythm in BMAL1 levels has not been determined. Results from our study indicate that the sensitivity of macrophages to inflammasome-activating stimuli differs with time of day.

NLRP3 inflammasome activity is involved in a number of pathologies and circadian control of NLRP3 inflammasome activity has been implicated as a contributing factor in time-of-day differences in inflammatory responses in colitis, fulminant hepatitis, and myocardial infarction (reviewed in Ref. [33]). It is possible that circadian control of NLRP3 inflammasome activity also contributes to time-of-day symptom manifestation in other conditions as well. For instance, like gout flare, episodes of renal colic have been found to be more common in the early hours of the morning compared with during the day.34 This has largely been attributed to a circadian variation in calcium oxalate crystal (kidney stone) formation35; however, NLRP3 inflammasome activation is also involved in urolithiasis in renal colic36 raising the possibility that circadian variation in NLRP3 inflammasome activity could also contribute.

The circadian clock influences immune cell trafficking, proliferation, and differentiation.13, 15 Therefore, there are multiple levels at which the circadian clock may lead to time-of-day differences in inflammation development. Findings from the present study raise the intriguing possibility that the nocturnal risk of gout flare is at least partially a consequence of altered circadian control of immune cell function as a result of MSU crystal-induced changes in the macrophage circadian clock.